The psychology of
gratitude part 2. Just continuing on this
discussion of gratitude, let's jump in here.
Everything is relative. Especially showing
gratitude, taking the time to think about
what you're grateful for. There's a psychological thing that happens when we do that. That's very important
for our mental health. I want to describe that and
we can maybe think about ways that can be used a little
bit more broadly as well. I want to start with a
story of depression. In fact, the way we
often will treat depression with cognitive
behavioral therapy. When we think of your
classic depressed person, that person is sometimes
described as having what we call cognitive biases or
maladaptive cognitive biases. Specifically, what
you often see is that a depressed person is hypersensitive to negative
things that happen. As we all go through our days, there are positive things
that happen along the way and there are negative things
that happen along the way. The claim is that a
normal cognitive approach would be to consider both of those things and to
weigh them when we, if somebody said
how was your day, we'd be like "that was pretty
good overall I guess." For a depressed person, the positive events don't get
a whole lot of attention, but the negative events do. In fact, they often
are hyper attentive to the negative events and they ruminate on
them quite often. They continue to think about
those negative events, sometimes until the next
negative event comes along and then they get hypersensitive to that and continue to think. When they look back at their day, it seems like a day full of negative events simply because the positive ones were
not really attended to or thought about nearly
as much as the negative. I'm saying here we're losing
the forest for the trees. What I mean by that, is that overall, the day might have actually
been pretty good. But if you keep focusing
on those negative trees and those are the ones
that draw your attention, then when you look at the forest, you're just going to
see the negative trees. The negative events
and you're losing the fact that so many
of the events that happened to you were not
negative and in fact, some of them were positive. This bias can happen to any of us when we're feeling stressed
and emotionally taxed, we start to get more of a pessimistic more of
a negative outlook. When negative things happen, we go, "there's another one, there's another one
and we get very focused on those negative events. They weigh on us and it just feels like every day
is a horrible day. Now, what does gratitude do? It tries to pull us out of that. Let's talk about the
depressed case for a moment. When we give therapy
to someone who's suffering from the
cognitive bias, we will often try to address that by changing
their attention, by trying to get those
positive things in there, a general strategy,
and then to talk about in an upcoming
lecture a little bit. But we will do things
like the following. We'll say, hey, listen, here's what I want you to
do at the end of each day? I want you to write
a journal where you highlight three positive things that happened during that day. You going to have to do that
at the end of every day. Now as the person is doing this, they know, I'm going to have to do that at the end of the day. As they go through the day now, if something positive happens, they might notice it a
little bit more and they might say, "hey,
that was positive. That's something I
could write about later and let me think about what
would I say about that." Now what are we doing? We're getting them to attend to the positive events and think about them a
little bit more. When that next positive
event comes, similarly, we hope they attend to it and think about it
in the next one, attend to it and think about it. What we're trying to do is to mess with their habit of
focusing on the negative. We're trying to bring in
some positive and shift their mind to one that's also
attentive to the positive. That's what gratitude does, if you sit down and think about what are you grateful for. Some of those, as I highlighted
in the previous talk are about the people in your lives and what they bring to you. But then there's
things like health and sun and mother Earth
and clean air, art, music, et cetera. Some of these things are not necessarily personal
relationship things, they are just great things
of about being alive, they are other trees
in our forest, and when we get really pulled to the negative
trees in that forest, it's sometimes good
to sit back and think about some of the positive
things that are there. That's what gratitude
is all about. You're not going to be grateful
for something horrible, probably, I assume. You will be grateful for
good things in life. As you go through and think about what those good things are, it's like you're looking
at the positive trees. The negative ones
are still there, but they are now
contextualized in the forest. The negative trees
are part of a forest that includes a whole lot
of good stuff as well and that can serve to reduce the emotional affect those
negative events are having. That's why gratitude is likely
such a positive force in such a positive practice
as we go through things. If we just bring
this together then, gratitude can really
put things in perspective by allowing us
to see that big picture, the entire forest as it were. It's very healthy to do that
every now and then so that those negative trees don't have more power than they deserve really is
when it goes down to. Part of that is that we're also highlighting the important social connections we have because we're usually
very grateful for those and that brings
all the benefits of feeling loved and part of
that larger community that I talked about in the
previous video. Gratitude brings together
those two things. Perspective mixed with humanity, really and the importance of their human connections and that's why it's such
a powerful thing. Next time, if it ever seems
all of this seems like a little hokey to sit
down and do this, try it, you'll
probably feel better. If you do feel better,
make note of that. Every now and then thinking about things I'm grateful for
makes me feel better. Maybe I should schedule
that in once a week. Maybe I should spend
Fridays at 2:30 thinking about what I'm
grateful for this week, the good things that
happened to me, et cetera. That can make you feel better. It can be another one of your
tools that you use to keep your mind at least now and
then in a more positive spot. Already onto the next module,
I will see you there.