Hello, everyone. This course is going to focus on gratitude with the aim
to build resilience, so we want to refresh the spirit. Gratitude is something
that has become a very popular part of wellness and there are a lot of scientific proven
benefits of gratitude, which I will touch on briefly. We're going to begin with
a gratitude reflection. But the focus here is to help us maintain optimism and
build resilience. We're going to engage
in gratitude practices. You're going to learn a bit
about BRITE journaling with gratitude and how you can reach out to others
expressing gratitude. Here, I'm going to start
off with a gratitude wall, and I want to give a special thank you
to Monica Tingling, who is a librarian at
University Health Network and helped to put together this
beautiful gratitude wall. This is very popular now
around you and you'll find them on the
patient care units. You'll find them in all
our respite centers as well as in the
corporate offices, because gratitude
is really something that we want to encourage us to cultivate as it builds our
resilience and as I speak, the resilience is for us. It means that we can bounce
back from difficult situation or experience and we all experience
challenges in our life, but know that we
are all resilient. It's just important for
us to optimize and keep cultivating it by doing
different activities. For today, we are going to begin with a
gratitude reflection, meditation to get in the right mindset and cultivate a deeper sense
of self awareness. Unlike some
traditional meditation that our focus on breathing, the gratitude meditation will use our full concentration to visualize all the things
that we're grateful for. It is so important for us to give each area the attention
that it deserves. Let's first talk about the
benefits of gratitude. We are looking at
Emmons and Stern's research and here they found that gratitude can reduce the lifetime risk of depression, anxiety and substance
abuse disorder, it creates situations where happiness thrive and
tangible benefits, of course, because we feel grateful and it
encourages sharing. I also want to shed
light on the work from Robert Emotion as he's the leading gratitude researcher and his work is linked
to how gratitude, improve positive emotion
and overall well-being. This study was done in 2014 and it was
published in the journal Emotion and this study was saying how when
you think someone, it gives you new acquaintances
as well as it make people more likely to have ongoing relationship or seek it out and it creates
new opportunities. So it is really something that a lot of studies have
shown to be beneficial for us. As we get into the gratitude
reflection meditation, I want to invite you to
take a moment to relax, and as you settle yourself
in a relaxed posture, take a few deep,
nourishing breaths. Hopefully this will help you
to relax and feel centered, and as you do so, let your awareness move to your immediate environment and all the things that
you can smell, taste, touch, see and hear and say to yourself for
this, I am grateful. Next bring to mind those
who put in your life to whom you are
close, your friends, family, partner, and say to yourself for this, I am grateful. Next, turn your
attention onto yourself. You are a unique individual
with imagination, the ability to communicate, to learn from the past and
to plan for the future, to overcome obstacles
you may be experiencing, say to yourself, for
this I am grateful. Finally rest into the realization that life is a precious gift. Say to yourself, for this, I am grateful and if you try to practice this on your own, you can take the
time to go through all the people
you're grateful for, all the physical objects
you're grateful for. Sometimes it's nice
to simply just show gratitude for the things
we often take for granted, like the ability to breathe,
touching our hands, the eyes that we have to see, the legs we have to
walk and run and I also want to share that we can magnify this even more and target different reasons
and choose high level things that we're grateful for
and we could start off by looking at three
things we can hear. Sorry, we could choose
high level things like our jobs and stuff and
family in our country, and then we get more specific so if you make this
a nightly practice, you can look at the
things you hear, see, smell around you
touch and feel and taste things that are blue, animals, friends, teachers,
professors and so on. There's many ways that
you can approach this. If we go on to the next exercise, we have here, the BRITE practice. BRITE means building resilience within
institutions together with everyone and with this, we are using this framework
at University Health Network, and this is one of
12 practices that we have and with the
gratitude practice, we want to encourage
people to notice, feel and share
appreciation and develop daily practice and
start to bring in three things in mind in your workplace or in your
home or school and be appreciative and lucky for
those items and know them. You can strengthen this practice by writing down the three things. Notice how your expression
of gratitude make you feel and notice
spontaneous moment of gratitude throughout the day. I know you feel when people express their gratitude to you so you could reach out and
thank someone by mail. As we get breaking down here, you see where you
can write them in calendar or get a
journal or you can go and show others you care by making
notes to classmates, friends, neighbors,
coworkers, and act on it, email them, let them know it. As you saw from the
gratitude wall, it's so beautiful
when you can display these notes and just really savor the moments when you
receive this gratitude. There are many tools and
proven benefits of gratitude, I've highlighted some, but it's worth it to look into these. Thank you so much.