Well, we're still on, the notion of resiliency, but this is where
I'm really going to introduce you to the
second approach. Just to make that clear. We've been talking a lot about how we can use the environment, to trigger, positive
mental states. We talked about
that around humor, around dancing and singing, around social connections,
around anticipation, those are all things we can do. We can configure our world, in a way where we're
going to continually have events that positively
impact our mental health, giving us a break from
anxiety, every now and then, a break from cortisol, and even some endorphins in there to counteract the effects. That's all really cool,
and very powerful, and a quick and easy way, to configure your life to be one more conducive towards
mental health. Of course, also you can use that, to create a context, in your institution, that
promotes mental health. What I'm going to talk about now, is a different approach. It's going to be a
skills based approach. Let's just relax. My point is, that sounds nice, just relax. There's a lot of
power to relaxation, but it's not something we
actually just know how to do, it's something we have to learn. But if we can learn the skill,
of summoning relaxation, over our body, this is a second, extremely powerful way,
to manage your anxiety. This one is going
to take some time, and effort and work. It is a skill, it's
going to take practice. But the good news is, if a person puts
the time into this, they will have, this skill
in their back pocket, and it will help them
every time they're encountering stress or anxiety. It takes a lot of work
to get the skill, but it's a really
powerful skill to have. Institutionally, by the way, let me just say at the onset, if I were running a
hospital, I might support, my staff and workers, everybody that works there, by having some way they
could come into a practice, session with this,
where they could work as a group and
learn the skill. If all of your employees
had this skill, there would be, less stress within your workplace.
That's all. For starters, let's unpack what we're talking about
a little bit more here. First of all, I want
to talk to you about this general principle that
psychologists often rely on, when it comes to behavior change. That is, what we call promoting the good and ignoring the bad, and if you ignore the bad
it'll get crowded out. Let me give you two
examples of this, one I've already given you. Let me give you
this really quick. We've talked about eating well, and I told you in that case, what a lot of people
do is they say, "I'm eating too much junk food, I'm eating too much ice cream,
I'm eating too much chips. I got to not eat that, not
eat that, not eat that". Of course, every time
they're thinking about something they should not eat, they're thinking
about that thing, and that makes them
want that thing. Whatever you think about, you give energy to, and you often don't want to give energy to the bad things. That's why I told you there, don't think about what
you don't want to eat. Identify foods that you wish you ate more of, healthy foods. Buy those foods, make
yourself eat those foods. If you eat the good stuff, and you eat lots of it, you're not going to crave, the bad stuff, and
you're not going to give it energy by thinking
about it directly. That's one of the
most effective ways, of changing your diet. Let me give you one other
example before we get into the one that
really matters here, just to make it clear, and
I always thought this is a fun one I give to my
class they always like it. Let's say, you are a new parent, and you have a young child. We'll call him little Johnny, and let's say little Johnny is, I don't know, about
four years old. At one point, you
had friends over, in your house, this
wasn't during COVID. You had friends
over at your house, and for whatever reason, little Johnny runs out of
his bedroom, and he's naked. He's not wearing any
clothes, whatsoever. What do your guests do? Well, they probably
laugh, and snicker, and they create a
positive experience. When Johnny comes out, now and he's greeted by
all of these smiles, and laughters, and isn't
he cute and blah, blah, blah, that's a reward, for him. The next time he hears people
out there, he might say, "I'm going to strip down
and go right at it again, because maybe they'll
all like it". Now you as the parent, might say, "I don't like it. I don't want my
child doing this". What are you going to do? Let's call that the bad behavior
now, running out naked. You could focus on that, and you could reprimand
little Johnny, and say, "Don't do that. Whatever you do, don't do that". Now, what's he going to be thinking the next time you have friends over and he's in
his room and hears friends? He's going to say,
"She doesn't want me to go running
out there naked", in which case he's
thinking about, running out there naked. Chances are pretty decent that, once he has that thought, he might go ahead and do that. Here's the other option. The other option is
to say, "Johnny, I'm going to have
some friends over, this afternoon, and if you
come out fully dressed, like a young man, then I am going to give you
a peanut butter cookie", or some reward like that. Notice, what we're doing now, is ignoring the bad. We're not even going to talk
about him running out naked, we're going to redefine a good." Here's what I'd love you to do. I'd love you to come,
out fully dressed, and if you do that, I will reward, you
for doing that". Now, of course, if
he does do that, come up fully
dressed, you'd better reward him, and reward him quick. But if you do that, it's a very easy way to get rid of that bad behavior
without even talking about it, without even focusing it, without even giving it energy. This is a general
principle that we use in psychology quite often, and it's what I'm
going to apply to this discussion on relaxation. Let's just go for low. Let me remind you of this slide, from the understanding
anxiety lecture. If you recall, I
was saying anxiety, activates this fight
or flight response. I told you that the fight
or flight response is, really, in every way, opposite, the rest
and digest response. If pupils constrict
here, they dilate here. If the breathing gets slower
here, it's faster there. If the heart rate's fast
here, it's slow there. They're all opposites.
When you're thinking, I don't want to feel like this, I don't want to feel that
fight-flight feeling, another way to say that is
I want to feel like this. I want to feel this
relaxed feeling. This is like naked Johnny. This is like Johnny
perfectly dressed. I don't want the naked Johnny, I want the Johnny
perfectly dressed. This is the notion, if we're feeling anxious and we want to feel less anxious, we cannot focus on the anxiety. We cannot say,
don't feel anxious. Why am I anxious?
Why am I sweating? Why is my handshaking? If we focus on the anxiety, we're going to empower it. We're going to give it energy and it's going to become worse. But instead, if we can say, "I want to be relaxed, I'm going to focus on becoming relaxed," that's the
opposite state of anxiety. If we can learn to
empower that relaxation, that other branch of the
sympathetic nervous system, the rest and digest, if we can bring that forward, then the anxiety will go
backward all by itself, and we won't give it the
energy by focusing on it. That all sounds nice. All I got to do is relax then. That's what you're saying
and that's what I'm saying; all you have to do is relax. However, you have to
learn how to relax. Most of us don't
know how to relax. We think just sitting on
the couch and putting our feet up and we
call that relaxation. I'm going to talk about
a deep body relaxation, a real feeling like
you were totally, utterly comfortable,
and that there's a feeling of your body
that comes with that; a lack of tension, a lack of stress. That's what you have to feel. That's what you have to learn to bring over your whole body. How do you do that? Let's start with an
analogy if we will. Star Trek, for any of you
guys who watch Star Trek, and I'm old enough
that I insist on using the old Star
Trek characters; they had something
called the transporter, and the transporter would
allow them to stand on these little pads and
somebody would put in coordinates of some
other place and they would dematerialize from here and they would rematerialize
at that other place. They could transport their body through space from
one place to another. In Star Trek, it was pretty easy. All they needed was
the coordinates of where they want to go. I'm going to tell you,
you can transport. Your mind has the ability
to transport your body and it can transport your body to that relaxed state of being. However, there's a difference. In order for our mind
to be able to do that, it has to be intimately aware of what that feeling feels like. It's like in order to transport yourself
to that destination, you have to know that
destination really well. You have to be really
familiar with it. If you're really
familiar with it, then you can go there. But it's that
knowing where you're going, that's really critical. So part of formally learning to relax is learning
where you're going. I've hit the first
two points here, but the bottom one is, how do we do that? Well, the first step
is the hardest step. In order to come to know
what relaxation feels like, we first need some
external resource to help us get there. Luckily, there are
lots of these around. I'm going to provide
one here with my attachments and I'm going to tell you about something else at the end of this too
that's even better. But there's this notion of what we're going to call
guided relaxation. You're going to need a
guide to bring you to that relaxed state
the first few times. Then once you're there; imagine this is like a guide
literally bringing you to some new location that you
might want to go back to. But, you know, the only way
I'm going to come back is if I really know that location. Once the guide brings you there, it's important that you really attend to what
that place feels like and that you give yourself a door and that door will be
what we call a trigger word. You're going to associate
that feeling with a word and that if you
connect those to enough, then the word will help
you get to that place. This is almost like
a Jedi mind trick. It's really cool and very
valuable, very powerful. Just to demystify what I'm talking about
a little bit more, because it probably sounds a
little ambiguous right now, let's make it concrete. What is a guided relaxation
audio and how does it work? This is just a taste of
what we're going to call progressive muscle
relaxation script. This is usually what
people use to guide somebody to a relaxed state, progressive muscle relaxation. But let's just look at it really quickly to
give you a sense. At first, it's just,
"Hey, welcome. Make sure you're warm
and comfortable, let your hands rest
loosely, close your eyes. Fine. Now, by the
way take a long, slow, deep breath
through your nose." All of these relaxation
inductions involve long, deep breaths that
you let it slowly. Why are you doing that? That is the rest and
digest way of breathing. The fight or flight way of
breathing is like this. Short, fast breaths, get lots of oxygen ready to
fight [inaudible]. The rest and digest is
slower, deeper breaths. Simply by doing that, we're promoting rest and digest. We're saying we're
going to mindfully, intentionally adopt
the breathing pattern that's associated with
the rest and digest mode and that's already one
step towards getting there. You're empowering your ability to relax and you have a lot of these deep
breaths to do that. Now, here's how this progressive
muscle relaxation works. It starts with various
muscle groups. Here we're at feet and toes. Breathing deeply, we're going
to do those breaths all the way through and as you do, curl your toes down and tense the muscles in
the soles of your feet. All through this, we
can go muscle group by muscle group and
we tense them first. We make them really tense
right on the edge of sore, of painful, but not quite there, but as tense as we can hold it. Then the critical point is
we then relax the tension, and as we relax the tension, we pay attention to
what that feels like, to let tension go away, to let it be replaced
by a relaxed feeling. We'll often do that
a couple of times, say with our feet, and
then we'll go up to our calves and our calf muscles. If you're sitting
right now, by the way, try lifting up on
your tippy-toes, but staying in a
sitting position. If you lift up on
your tippy-toes and you do it just the
right way you should be able to clench
your calf muscles so that they're really tight. If you're taking a deep
breath and you clench those calf muscles
until they're really tight and you hold them
for quite a while, hold them as long as you can, keep them really tight, and then at some point, you exhale and you let that tension go out
of your calf muscles. Again, same idea,
feel the tension leave and associate
that with a word. You're going to see I'm
using the word rain and you'll find out why
in just a moment. But you say that word
rain and you let that tension go and then
you move up to your calves, your buttocks, your stomach
muscles, your chest muscles, your arms, your shoulders, your back, your neck, your face. At the end you're
doing things like this probably [inaudible] , fun things like that to
get all your face muscles, clench with all
your face muscles, tensing them up, and
then relaxing them. After you go through
one of these sessions, just listening and doing
what the person says, you feel extremely relaxed,
just very comfortable. I'm going to
recommend to you that this is something you
consider doing just before bed because it's a great way to get your body
into a comfortable place. Remember what we talked
about the sleep, the importance of sleep, this is a great way
to prepare for sleep. Now, some of these
are 10 minutes, some of these are 20
minutes but they would walk you through and get
you to that place, and part of it is getting there. I mean, just getting there
is going to make you feel better for now. You're going to be at
that relaxed place, which will give you a break from anxiety which will be fantastic. But the bigger goal is
to learn how to come back to this place
any time you want to. With that bigger goal in mind, what we recommend is really pay attention to what
that feels like, get very familiar with what
relaxation really feels like. Associate that with a word, rain, relax, rain feels so good. That's an important
thing and you would do this over and over,
night after night. In fact, let me walk you through the steps that you would go
through to build the skill. You would start doing
exactly what we talked about using guided relaxation, get you to that place, and then attend to that place, associate it with a trigger word and do this as often as you can. You want to get really
familiar with relaxation. When you feel like you've
done this quite a few times and you feel like I have a good sense of what
that feels like, try it without the
guided relaxation. Just try laying down or
sitting in your chair and either do it yourself, clenching all your muscle
groups, which is fine. You can just do it yourself
now but you may even find, I should call this 2.5, that at some point you may not have to do all the muscle tensing thing. You might just be able to get your whole body to that place it was after you've done all
the muscle tensing thing, and so that it just comes and you can sermon relaxation,
is what I would call it. Once you feel like you're
pretty good at doing that, then I recommend just have some random alerts on your phone. Just put in some alarms in
the morning at various times, maybe three or four
times during the day, and then when those
alarms go off. Use those as an
environmental trigger. Whatever you were
doing at the time, I'm just creating it. I'm going to pause and I'm
going to take a moment, and put myself to the
right relaxed state. Can I do this on command while
I'm going through my life? Alarm just goes off. I try to
see if I can pull this in. By the way, if you
can't do anything, then you go back steps. I always go back to number
one if you need to. Bu if you're getting good at
doing this, then the final, and most important step combines this with what
we talked about before, becoming aware of when
you're anxious and remember, I said sometimes working with a buddy really helps you here. In fact, learning the skill
with a buddy or with a group institutionally maybe would be a really good idea
because then if a group, let's say everybody on your
ward was doing this together, and now somebody on
your ward is anxious, you can point to that
person, and say. Rain, rain, rain, come on, rain, rain, and then rain
in the anxiety, you can say that,
and the person can then say oh I'm I anxious because they might
not know, they were. Let me bring it back down. You can work with one another, and where you ultimately
want to get to the point is when you recognize the
anxiety in yourself, you recognize that
anxiety building, and then you kick
in your relaxation. You focus on the relaxation
and keep in mind, that's what we're doing
here, all the way back. We're not empowering the anxiety. We're going to say,
oh, I'm anxious. Therefore, let me think about relaxing that I'm going to stop thinking
about anxiety now. I'm going to focus on relaxing. Very powerful skill, but
it is described here. You have to put some work
into it some serious time, and effort to make this happen. But if you do then any time you feel anxious or emotional. It's more about
emotional control. You get in some
argument with somebody, and you feel like I'm
getting really really angry. You can use this to put
yourself into a relaxed state, and allow yourself to respond rationally instead
of emotionally. Last thing I'll say about this
is this is the hard step. Learning what
relaxation feels like, getting intimate
with that feeling. By the time you guys
are seeing this, this is just about
to be released. We're about to
release an app called Little Rain that should be available wherever
you get your apps. It's free, no cost. It's meant to give you that
practice where you can listen to progressive
muscle relaxation audios, short ones or long ones, which comes a number
of different languages and it actually
tracks your practice. You grow flowers
when you practice, a beautiful garden grows, and you can give flowers
to other people. We're game of buying
all this stuff. What it's core is this, number 1, giving you practice so that you get to know that
relaxation step, and then you can move on
to two, three and four. Take a look for the
Little Rain app. I'm also going to include a guided relaxation audio
here with the attachments. Let me also mention they're
all over the Internet. If for whatever reason, my guided relaxation thing
isn't your cup of tea, look online guided relaxation or progressive muscle
relaxation audio. You'll find a ton, and they'll probably be one
that that suits you well. It doesn't matter which one you use as long as it
gets you to the spot. Cool. The skill of
summoning relaxation. It's a powerful different
approach to managing anxiety, and one I highly recommend
that you take the time, and energy to learn. It'll do you well all
through your life. Thank you. See in the next one.