Hey. Welcome back. All ready? Yeah, so at the end
of a distress from stress talk Heather had singing and dancing
featured quite heavily. Music in general Mack the Knife, her friend doing
that great dance. I want to talk about the larger point from that and then I'm going
to come back into music. We will bounce around.
But yeah, let's go. Music and the news. Here's the bigger point. Using the environment
to escape anxiety. Let's walk through
this. Here you are. I know you don't look
exactly like that, but that's what you
look like looking up. Let's imagine you're
watching something. Let's imagine you're
just first of all you say you're
going through life. As we go through life, of course, we have thoughts
going on in our mind. It's like the stream
of consciousness, as William James called
it, never stops. We keep having these thoughts, but these thoughts are not
just happening independently. They're affected by well,
primarily the environment. If we choose to
say watch the news and at this point in time, the news where I am right
now is very depressing. We are in April in the COVID pandemic in 2021
and we're seeing things like this in the so-called third
wave where we're seeing case counts go up the roof
and there's a lot of worry. When you see that, when you're watching
this and you're thinking those thoughts the
environment is bringing, I mean, you're basically
staring at the bear. If COVID was a bear, you're staring at the bear and you're thinking about
how dangerous it is, how mysterious is it, when will it ever end? All of these thoughts start
coming into your head. But of course, they didn't
just pop into your head. The news put them in your head. Well, how did the news do that? Well you chose to sit in front
of the news in some way. Now, maybe you didn't choose. Maybe a family member chose, but for whatever reason, you put your body in front of that stimulus and that stimulus did its thing and
made you anxious. That's how things work. But the good news
is we can use that. We can say, "Okay, if I watch the news,
I get anxious. I get these anxious
thoughts in my head. Well, what if I watch music, watch a live concert?" I just happened to
watch Brian Setzer, a stray cat struts
doing their thing, Stray Cat Strut,
sorry, Stray Cats. They do the song Stray Cat Strut. They're full of energy
and excitement and playing guitar like crazy
and when you watch that, you're seeing a happy
crowd having a great time, a band having a great
time delivering a whole lot of energy and well, that does something
else to your mind. It makes you feel more happy, more energetic, more positive. What is the critical point here? Well, the critical point is we can control our television. What I'm telling you is by
controlling your television, you can control your mind. Not just your television, but your life in general. The things that you
choose to expose yourself to will show up in your thoughts. Now, some of the things we get exposed to, we don't choose. Some things just happen to us and again, they
change our thoughts. But some of the things
that happen to us, we choose to engage in. I'm going to suggest to you that if you want
to manage anxiety, you have to take a
bigger role in that. You have to choose
to choose more. You have to say, "I am going
to schedule certain events. I am going to consciously
decide to watch some music or do some dancing." You'll see some of my other
suggestions that I make. Because doing so will put my
mind into a better state. I'm going to unpack
that a little bit more. But let me just hit
over the head this, because we're going to
come back to this over and over in the course with a lot of the
different strategies. In fact, I'm going to suggest that the strategies will fall mostly into two camps and
this is one of the camps. Let's just deal with
this camp first. If you want to manage your mind, if you want to manage your
anxious thoughts, one way, and perhaps the easiest
and quickest way to do that is to manage the environmental
triggers that bring certain thoughts or
feelings into your mind. By choosing what you
expose yourself to, you can affect the
contents of your mind. Let's dig in a little bit more as a case study and following
from Heather's notion. She really highlighted
the power of music, and music is extremely powerful. So just to talk about music for a moment and we think about it. Specific songs are
most present in our lives during certain
time periods in our life. That seems a little
redundant. But anyway, then the songs mostly disappear. There's song is that play for months or maybe
even a year if it's a very popular song and a
bunch of things happened to us during that time and
then they go away. I'm sure they pop up now and then we hear them now and then. But as far as regularly
hearing them, they're only regularly being played for a certain
interval of time. Some of these songs
during those times become strongly bound to important
things in our lives, events, vacations, parties,
road trips, relationships. That's our song,
that kind of thing. These songs get really
powerfully connected. The first case, we can
talk about songs just becoming connected to
a time in our life. In this case, we can talk
about songs being very particularly connected
to events in our lives. I'll give you an example
of this, by the way. My wife and I went to Mexico at one point and we went
on one of these zip line tours and I say not the tour and the way
that worked is in the tour bus they drove
us there and as we were pulling into the area
where these tours were, they played Guns N' Roses'
Welcome to the Jungle. Welcome to the Jungle. That song now, every
time I hear it, I'm back in that bus. I'm going into the
zip line experience, which was a really great day, except I lost a
ring in a snow day. If you see it in
Mexico, it's mine. But other than that, it was a really good
day and it's become so strongly connected that that
song brings that to mind. This is the actual point. Imagine you're living
in a COVID period, you've just had a hard
time for a while or whatever other stressful event
is going on in your life. If you hear a song, from before all the
stress happened, that song can trigger the
memories and emotions that it has associated
with it and if these are from a good
time in your life, if these are from
a positive time, they will put your mind
into a positive state. I will have those memories of Mexico in my mind of going
into that experience. You might have different
memories depending on the specific song,
that it happened. But the important point is
they're transporting you, in time and space to a better
time and a happier place, that's what music can do. It's more than that too, but cognitively,
that's what it can do. That's how it can change
the channel on your mind. One very easy thing to do
if you're really feeling down is to go create a
playlist or find a playlist, you can do things
now like 80 songs, if that's when you were young, that age when we're 12-20 music is very important
in our lives then. If we play songs that
were popular for us, then we're going to be
transported back to that time, and it's going to
make us feel good. Use music in that way and maybe even give a playlist
to somebody else, if you want them to feel happy. Now, I've been talking
on a personal level, institutionaly, you might use if you have a respite center in your
institution or someplace for people to relax that maybe
you could have a room that's relatively soundproof
where they could go in and listen to music or even do some
of the other things. I'll tell you about in a moment, as a way to just get away from the stress of the
hospital for a while, a nice comfortable chair or
a place where they can watch some live music and have
some choices available to them or just music generally. Upbeat, positive music playing in the respite center that can do a lot for helping people just get their mind
out of where they are. There's something special
about music beyond that, too. It's not just music. But let me start with music. When we listen to music, when we get into this
positive mindset, it actually changes what
happens in our body. When we're stressed, cortisol
is the main hormone, having playing its role. It's really exposure
to cortisol in a chronic way that's leading to all the negative
effects of stress. When we calm down, levels of cortisol drop, and in fact, endorphins and oxytocin, and serotonin increase. Just to be clear you
guys know oxytocin, while oxytocin is
more of a trust. For example, if you were
singing with somebody else and having fun
after that experience, you'll feel a little more
connected to that person. You'll like them a
little bit more. It's the stress drug, some people call it
the love drug, etc., Endorphins make you
feel really good more important than all of that, they counteract the negative
effects of cortisol. It's not a stretch to say, that things that put you
into that happy state that music is key to think about. They are medicine. They are counteracting the
negative effects of cortisol. You should think of them
that way and you should consider again mindfully having time every day when you just
engage in music or well, there's a couple of other
activities and let me highlight them and we'll talk about them personally and institutionally. Singing is fantastic. What I'm imagining here
is maybe your family has, Wednesday night mental health night when you all do karaoke, every one of our
smart TVs these days, if you go into the menus, you will find karaoke. It will play a song and show you the words and
you can sing along. You can do karaoke
with your family. What's really fun is get
the old people to do the current songs and get the kids to do the classic rock, have fun trying to sing each other's music and laughing at each
other as you do so. Singing is very powerful
in terms of releasing those endorphins when
you get into it and have fun super powerful. That's one of the often music promotes singing automatically.
We start singing along. That's what gives it
some extra Module 2, dancing is also very powerful. Maybe in some mental
health nights, you have we're going
to learn how to have a country line dancing
here because it's fun. But it could be Zumba, it could be whatever. But spending some time
moving your body in a dance way to music is
very powerful as well. Now, institutionally,
again at a respite center, you could have these options. You could have certain
times when the staff can come and do some
karaoke or do some silly country line
dancing and that is a way to really help them escape the stresses
that they're feeling. I just wanted to highlight
that again and I want to do it in two ways again,
that I want to stress. One is just the general idea of using the environment
to put somebody in a better mind state or to put yourself in a better mind state. It's not that complicated. Expose yourself to
the things that produce happy feelings
in your mind. I also wanted to highlight,
music and dancing and singing are especially
powerful in that regard. These are great things to include anything that
makes you sing, dance, or bop along to music is great and use that schedule that. Cool, I'll see you
next month bye-bye.