Hey. Burnout, it's not an
optimistic topic, isn't it? Well, it's a real part of your chosen career,
a lot of careers, but especially your career, which just makes so many
strong stress demands on you. What do you do? To some extent, burnout is a failure of everything we
talked about before, a failure of resilience, and etc. You've been trying to keep stuff together and at some point, you just reach the point
of being burnt out. What I want to do here is
talk about that a little bit, again, from a
psychological perspective. Then I really want to
talk about the power of perspective to help out then. It'll be a bit of a weird talk, but that's how it goes. Let's start here from
the work of Hans Selye. Hans Selye, I've mentioned
him a couple times, but he really did this critical
original work on stress. It's his work that shows us
clearly that our thoughts and our mental experiences have physical effects on the body through the release of cortisol. He identified this what he called general
adaptation syndrome, where if you were
undergoing stress, you have these three steps. Whereat first, you
react to that stress, you're mobilizing
resources as it were. We call that the
alarm reaction phase. But then this is the one
we've been talking about through most of this course,
the resistance phase, the stressor is out there and you're trying to perform
with it in your presence, and you're doing all you can. What this really suggests is you can only do
that for so long. In fact, we like a
little bit of stress. We can handle a bit of stress. You see that for a
while we're actually performing quite well
with the stress. But we reach a point where literally we can no
longer resist it. We're marshaling forces against it and at some point
that starts to drop, and that's where
we see this arrow. That's really what we're
talking about here, is a burnout step. When you just feel like, "Yesterday, I was
keeping stuff together. Today, I don't feel
like I got my stuff together." What do we mean? Let's go a little
bit clearer here and separate out what we've
been talking about, stress versus what we're talking about now,
which is burnout. When we talk about stress, we'll say sometimes a person is putting in too much effort. They feel energized. To some extent when you're
anxious, you're energized. When you're burnt out, you're not really energized anymore,
you're just feeling. Again, stress, you feel
emotions more strongly. When you're stressed, that's
that fight or flight. We see this emotionality. When someone's burnt out, their emotions are
actually blunted. It starts to be a blase attitude. Again, stress, you're
hyperactive and anxious, burnt out, drained, and helpless. We're going to talk about this
helpless word because it's an important word to
understand burnout. Stress, you have less energy, but burnout you have
less motivation. Stressed is a physical toll, burnout takes an emotional toll. Let's just look at the
burnout column here. We have the contrast. But this idea hard
to put in effort. Don't feel any strong emotions
about much of anything. You feel really blunt
and exhausted, drained, helpless, not motivated,
you're just, why bother? It's taking an
emotional toll often because we feel we are failing, we are giving up, that's it. That's not a good
feeling to have. Let me bring in a little
bit of psychology here to give you a
sense and to really highlight this word
helpless because this is a big part of the
burnout feeling. This is an experiment
I don't love. I will mention that
at the outset. But I'm going to describe it to you because it makes a point and it'll probably
stick in with you. I don't love it because I'm
an animal lover in general, a dog lover especially, and this involves dogs and giving them electric
shocks, which sucks. But here's the idea. We have a dog in a chamber like this. We have a side of the
floor that can be electrified and a side
that's never electrified. What we do at first is we teach the dog a simple association. We turn on a light, and just after the light, we're going to electrify
the floor here. Every animal hates the
feeling of electricity. We're not talking about
enough electricity here to cause any damage, but every organism
hates that feeling. The dog will quickly learn, okay. This light predicts electricity, I'm getting out of here. When the light goes on, it
escapes the negative stimulus. Okay. That's easy enough. That's the beginning.
Here's where it gets a little nasty. They then increase
this barrier to the total height so the dog can no longer escape
to the other side. What happens now? When you turn on
the light at first, the dog tries to escape. It looks for every
potential way to get out, but after a while,
something happens. It stops trying. At some point, in fact, it just lays in the corner of that cage
and the light comes on and the shock comes
on and it just takes it. In fact, in the critical
part of the experiment, after the dog has done
that for a while, just sat in the corner, they again reduce the barrier, so now the dog could escape if it tried, but it doesn't try. It just sits there and
it takes the shocks. This is work done by a guy
named Martin Seligman, and Seligman argued that
the dog has at that point reached something called
learned helplessness, a state that he connected
with depression, although some people argue that it's not the same as depression, but it is partly burnout. It's that feeling like, "My goodness, we've
tried everything we can. We've been working like
heck to get control of whatever and we're
not getting there. Nothing we're doing is helping. The situation is continuing to be as bad or getting worse." When we're in those sorts of situations where we're
trying like heck, and we just feel like our
efforts are not enough, they are not doing it, we can reach this point of learned helplessness and
it's very demotivating. Remember, part of burnout is that lack of motivation because it moves you from what we call an internal locus of
control to an external. What we mean by that is, when you have an internal
locus of control, you have this feeling
like what you do matters, and with the right work
or doing the right things will lead to certain outcomes that you want to see realized. You feel like you have the
power to shape the future. An external locus of control is someone who doesn't
feel that power, feels like things just happen and nothing I can do is
going to change them. When we get that external
locus of control, when it starts shifting that way, that's the path to helplessness,
to learned helplessness, to feeling like, "Why
bother, it doesn't matter." That's a very tricky
state and it's a core part of the
burnout feeling, and so a good state
to understand, partly because there are some approaches to
dealing with this. I have a URL here, this is the same URL, and it draws heavily
from this book. This is the guy that did the learned helplessness
experiment, but he has a book called
Learned Optimism, which is all about trying to not fall into that learned
helplessness state. It involves a number
of different things, and if you go to this website, you can find out
some of the details. I'm really going to highlight perspective taking and
the power of that. I'm going to do it from
a very big picture sense because we've gone
through this long course, this is pretty much near the end, so I figured this is a time
to zoom out a little big. I'm going to do that now. Take you back to the
Industrial Revolution. In the Industrial Revolution, factories were having their
hay day and we were getting people to work in
factories but originally, they were working ridiculous
hours in factories. There was a labor movement
and this was their slogan. This is the creation of the eight-hour work week:
"Eight hours of labor, eight hours recreation,
eight hours rest." That's what they fought for and eventually won the
eight-hour workday. I don't know how many of you
guys enjoy our workdays, but this was a big deal. When you look at it like this, I like seeing the slogan because it really puts
labor in its place. It puts their careers
in their place, and that's really what I want
to get you to think about. If you look at this, it's actually one-third of your life is spent
in the workplace, one-third of your life
is just sleep and getting that physical
restrengthening, but eight hours of recreation, one-third of your life, and this is your
pre-retirement life, his is your working life, one-third of your life should be about things that you want to do, things that make you feel good, and this is the part
that fights burnout. These eight hours are critical in terms of re-balancing
you mentally, almost just like the
rest is necessary for our physical health and for
our mental health by the way, but this recreation time, this time we spend
with friends and family doing the
events of our life. It's very important, and sometimes in situations
where we have burnout, what we see is that somebody is really focusing heavily on their work and sometimes to the detriment of
their recreation, and that can lead to
burnout then there. So realize the importance of the rest of your
life, the outside work. In fact, I'm going
to make this point in a dramatic way here. When work feels overwhelming, remember that you're
going to die. There is an nice optimistic
thought for you, but yeah, I often like
this deathbed perspective. It's a little morbid, but it's very powerful
to every now and then, whether we're talking about using visualization and imagery. I every now and then
visualize myself dying. Sounds depressing in a hospital
bed, and then thinking, from that perspective, what's
important to me right now. I think in what most
of us will think is important is the family
and the memories, and the things we've
done with our life. I think this quote is interesting for putting things
in perspective. If you died tonight,
your employer, would have a job advert
to fill your role by the end of the month, maybe less. I've heard other
people say you will be so quickly forgotten
in your place of work that it would make
your head spin months after you're gone a month or two, you're mostly forgotten. But your friends and family
would miss you forever. Don't get so busy on
making a living that you forget to work
on making a life. That's the recreation side. Notice that that's as important. It should be in your life, you should be investing as
much time and effort into your own personal recreation
as you are into your career. Now I fully understand that
with health care work, sometimes, it's a
little different, you read things so busy on making a living that you
forget to work and you think about these people that are just working 60 hours a week to make as much
money or 80 hours a week to make as much
money as they can. Often I think you guys feel compelled to work
because you're needed, and that's a different
dynamic that brings in this whole psychological angle of what you're doing there, and I would say even then, you have to remember to
think about yourself, especially when work is
getting really overwhelming. One of the options I'm going
to suggest is that you, realize the importance
of the recreation side, and you every now and then
say in a very assertive way, I need some time for
the rest of my life. I need to work on
this recreation side. I need to work on my personal
enjoyment side because only then can I have to
get that back in balance, and that's what we're
talking about here. What my message is with respect to to
burnout for you guys is, first of all, know what the symptoms are and
we've talked about them. Sense that difference between
anxiety and helplessness. When you get to that
helplessness thing, that's a sign that you're
feeling pretty burnt out. Understand, you and your employer
should understand this that working while burnt out can be dangerous for you
and your patients. You're not necessarily being noble by fighting
through the burnout. You shouldn't see it that way. They shouldn't see it that way. I started by saying
burnout is a failure, and I don't mean that at a
personal level, but I mean, it's a symptom that somebody has been exposed to so
much stress for so long that their system
cannot handle it anymore. That person then needs a break. They need a chance to
escape the stress. Keeping them in that situation is just going to be
dangerous for them, and dangerous for the people they work with, including
their patients. I'm stressing that because I think sometimes people feel self conscious about telling somebody I'm completely burnt out, I need a break, but
when you feel that way, you need to get away and
it's the right thing to do. That's what I want
to impress on you. It's being assertive with potentially your employer or
whatever and just saying, listen, I really need
to get out of here. I need some time, and understanding
that's just a truth. It's better to get away and get refreshed than it
is to tough it out. You really want to give
your patients the best you, and if you're burnt out, that is not the best you. This is a real place to be assertive and to
represent yourself well, and your employer
should respect that. Let's go to the employer
side from the institution. What can an institution
do to try to prevent burnout or to deal with
it when it happens? First of all, to prevent, Heather talked in her video, about respite centers
that she's created. They have centers right within the hospitals where people can escape the stress
for a little while. Maybe they can do
karaoke or maybe there's a yoga opportunity there or stress balls that they
can interact with or comedy is playing that will make them laugh
a little bit, etc. All the things we've talked about could be part
of a respite center. You should certainly
have that so that if somebody just needs to get
away for half an hour, sometimes that's all it. I'm burned out. I
need a half an hour, an hour just to get
away from this. Then they can do
that very easily. But if it's more than that, if it's not just I
need a half an hour, an hour, I need a week. I need to be away for a week or two weeks or
something like that. You really have to respect that. First of all, you want to ensure that the demands
you're making are not hopefully putting staff in
these uncomfortable positions. Realize that when
you ask them to work an extra shift or
anything like that, you are asking them
to spend less time around those people and doing those things that support
their mental health. It may seem valiant
for them to say, "Sure, I'll do that." But in fact, it's not right thing to ask somebody because you want your staff at their best and you should
almost see those eight hours of recreation as time they need to be their best when you have them for
those eight hours. You really want to
think about that. This isn't something
where there's no cost to having somebody
work extra hours. Those people are
paying a cost for that and that could creep into
their performance as well. What I would love,
and I think this is probably not possible. I don't know for various reasons, but from my interaction with
healthcare professionals, it seems like they're
continually working different hours. That's not good. At the core, remember
the foundations of mental health and
remember that idea of a structured schedule
where you put in some mental health
things that all works when you can keep
a structured schedule. But as soon as your
work day starts shifting all over the place, A, you can't do that
mental health habit forming as easily as you can, and you're recreation time
gets messed up because your family never knows when you're off and when you're not. These inconsistent
shifts, this is the single easiest thing I think that that could help
mental health for a lot of health care workers
is if they could. No, I'm working five days
a week between X and Y and that's my shift. That's what it'll be, and
my family can know that, we can plan around that, we can use our recreation time to refresh and that's
really important. The final point here is we must respect our staff when they say they're
feeling burnt out. They know when they're
feeling burnt out, and we know that a burnt out
staff member makes mistakes. They're exhausted. They
can't think very well. They're [inaudible] , they've
told you all these things. We have to realize, we do not want burnt out
staff members working. We want them recharging. Yes, that could cause additional
stress for other people. How do we manage that? I understand the complexities of the context that
I'm talking about, but I'm just trying
to give you a sense of the factors at
play and how you can maybe work some of them to
get the effect you want. It's all about the schedule. I'm just going to leave
you with the schedule. Again, because this is really the overall thought I want you to have as
you go into this, which is you have control. You can create a life whereby you are controlling
what's on your mind. You do that again by
focusing on the positive, not focusing on the anxiety, but what are the things
I can do that I think will have a positive
impact on me. We've talked about a lot of
them throughout this course, but get serious about them. Schedule them, make sure
they're part of your life. That recreation time
we've been talking about, make sure it has some
activities in here that charge you and
make you feel good. If you can live a
regular schedule, go to sleep at the same time, get up at the same time,
that's a huge win. Excellent. We'll see you
at the goodbye video, but I just want to say
it's been a pleasure and I hope you found something
useful out of this. I will see you in
a moment. Bye bye.