Hey, so what do you think of
that laughter yoga stuff? At first it seems a little silly, but did you play along? Did you start to have fun? The ho, ho, ho, ha, ha. I was smiling. I was enjoying it, and I felt something when I was smiling and enjoying it, I felt better. I'm going to take off
from there and yeah, do something across
the next two videos. Let's just start with this, one put on a happy face and I want to use this just
to tell you about some cool, interesting psychology that I think you'll find interesting. But it is also relevant to
this notion of trying to help ourselves or others
to feel better, especially in times
of chronic anxiety. Okay, let's jump into here. There's some very famous
research that was originally, I mean, a lot of it is
associated with Paul Ekman, where they went to
these famous islands where there's no media and no interaction with the outside world and they nonetheless asked
people on this island, this is one gentleman in specific to wear
certain emotions, show what their face would look like when they were
feeling a certain emotion. These were the four they
were asked to try anger, sadness, disgust and happiness. Again, these people had watched
no movies that we watch, nothing except they had no interaction with humans outside of their close community, and yet what you see was a pretty easily identifiable
way to do things. Which would you say
this is, for example? I think that's anger,
sadness, happiness, disgust. We all crunch up our
nose for disgust. Okay, and what Paul
was suggesting here is that these
emotions are universal, that they are part of
our basic programming. These are not something
we learn as a child, it's just programmed within us. It's universal and
that allows us, of course, to recognize
emotional states. It's not such a cultural barrier. You know even if someone
from another culture, you know if they're
angry with you, you know if they're sad, et cetera and so Ekman got
really interested in this. He gets really interested
in the role that these specific muscles
were playing in terms of wearing certain
emotions and he and his wife began by creating all these faces and literally learning all of those muscles that were
associated with things, and then they could read these, what we call micro-expressions. They learned how to look
at someone's face and have a really good sense of
the emotion they're feeling. Now, what we're
talking about here isn't necessarily
this kind of emotion. People were like
[inaudible] because we can all recognize that, it was micro versions of this. Let's say you're
playing poker with somebody and they're
looking at their cards. They try not to move their face, but they may move
their face a little bit and Ekman got really good at noticing which muscles moved
and then from that reading, what emotion that
person is feeling. Do they feel excitement?
That probably means they got a good card. Do they feel bummed out? That means they have a
bad card and et cetera. You can use that
information and et cetera. As Paul and his wife were
learning this, though. Oh, let me just say, that notion Paul now has a consulting company where
he does this and infact, if any of you have watched
the series Lie to me, the main character here is
essentially Paul Ekman, except of course, they exaggerate his abilities and et
cetera in this TV show. But this is the idea almost
of his consulting company, helping people if you have a witness or something and
you want to interrogate them, Paul can watch as you do it
and give you his insights about whether the person is lying or if they're
feeling angry, if they're feeling
scared, et cetera. Okay, all well and good. All really interesting. There's a good book
called Blink if you're interested into a
lot of these things. But I want to take it
this other direction, because there is something really interesting that Paul
and his wife discovered. One of the things they did as they were trying to understand the muscles that were involved in emotions is they themselves
tried to wear those emotions. They would see a
face and they'd say, okay let's do the sad face
and let's see what muscles, let's try to hold our face
sad as long as possible, or let's do a happy face. Let's try to hold our face
happy as long as possible. What they discovered was that- It's not a straight line
from emotion to the face. Let me say it this way. This is how we think of it. We think there's stimulus, maybe it's something out
in the world that we saw, watching the news maybe. Maybe it's a thought that
came into your head, but it triggers an emotion in us. That emotion then is displayed
on our face somehow. We think of the face as like
a monitor on a computer. It just displays the
emotion of the system. But what Paul and his
wife found was this, it's not just one way like this. When they wore a sad
face for long enough, they started to feel sad. If they wore a happy face, they started to feel happy. They learned, in fact, that the face and the
muscles of the face actually partly determine
your emotional state. Yes, there's the other thoughts, and things that
are affecting you, but you can control your emotion by
controlling your face. We've got this from
Bye Bye Birdie, 1963, "Gray skies are
going to clear up, put on a happy face.
Brush off the clouds. " This sounds really
annoying and somehow, especially if you're
angry or sad. Somebody just saying,
"Put on a happy face." But it works, like
the laughter yoga. Expose yourself to something
that gets you laughing, and gets you smiling, and it produces that
emotional state in you. Therefore, it becomes
an effective way of affecting your own mental
state through the emotions. Now, this is good
for the individual. It's sometimes hard to hold. You can't just keep saying, "I'm going to go through
life with a happy face, I'm going to do this
all the time," because something will bother you, and the normal
process will kick in. It's hard to override
that all the time, but I'll talk in the
next video about some ways you can use this fact to give yourself a break from
anxiety every now and then. But first of all,
let's step away from the individual here and
talk about it now again, more at the institutional
level again. What might you do? I don't know if any
of you guys saw the movie, Patch Adams. There's a good point in
this movie, Patch Adams. The point was this
was in a ward where young people who were in a
bad medical situation were. Robin Williams plays a
doctor, and he goes in, and he noticed how
depressing the context is. It's like everybody's
just waiting for the next kid to die. He thought, "This is not
a healthy environment. This is not an environment that produces mental wellness." He started doing things
like wearing a rubber nose, and sticking silly
things in his hair, and ultimately dressing
up as a clown. What he found was, when he created that
more happy environment, this is a true story, by the way, the prognosis of the
patients got better. They felt better, they
survived longer, etc. A little bit of happiness
in the context was very instrumental towards creating a better mental
health situation. How can you use this if you're a wellness
officer or something? Well, you could do the
Patch Adams thing. You could try in
the hospital itself to bring in some
happiness and whatnot. That's going to be tricky if it's a highly stressful
situation because when people are doing their
doctor and nursing thing, they're right in
the middle of it. But when they go to
the respite centers, when they get a chance
to get away from that, you would really like
the context they go to radiate positive emotions, to have smiling
faces on the walls, to have comedies available for them to watch in a
short period of time, to have maybe music
playing that is positive, that tends to have
upbeat messages, etc. By surrounding them
with positivity, and having them see happiness, they will more likely mirror that happiness through something we call observational learning, "Monkey see, monkey do." We tend to mirror
what's around us. If they do that, they will
tend to feel better as well. This a real reason to think
hard about how you decorate, how you set up a
respite center and make sure that everything in there
is radiating positivity. That's the best way to help
people in that situation. I'm going to jump back to the laughter yoga a little bit in the next video from a different angle. I
hope to see you there.