Hello. Welcome to the refresh from stress session. I hope you're going to feel refresh at the end
of this session. This pandemic has brought on a lot of stressors in our lives, to say the least. As a wellness manager, I'm constantly
collaborating my responses to meet new needs and demands. At the university, I have a
health network, where I work. We started off with six respite center as a response to the pandemic last March. A year later, almost
a year and a half, they're still up and running. This is an opportunity
for staff to take a break from their regular
duties and destress, and they receive refreshments. They have activities there, there's music playing, and oftentimes people
say, "I feel good. This helps me to
feel refreshed." Today, this session
that I'm offering you is from what we call
a refresh menu. We create a menu of activities. We go on the units
and engaged staff in quick break and
wellness such as yoga, we'll do laughter activities, we'll make bath bombs, and this activity
refresh from stress. We're also encouraging
this online, for the folks who
are working at home. We also have online activities. For this session, I wanted to learn about the way
that stress can impact on your health
and provide you tools and resources
to cope with stress. I'm going to be engaging you in a little bit of
self-reflection with stress index tool and also invite you to participate
in movement with music. What is stress? It's a
part of everyday life. It's a normal way
of responding to pressures, demands,
and situation. There's good and bad stress. We can manage good stress
and use it to our advantage, to have balances and
set goals in our life. But it's bad stress
that can harm our health and cause
sickness and so forth. Let's look at this graphic from environmental
health project. You can see where stress
can affect the brain, the heart, the
pancreas, the stomach. You see more details on this chart if you put
a pause on this video, if you're curious to learn more. There's a wide body of
literature that speaks to how stress impacts the body. The Canadian Heart and
Stroke Foundation website, you can also go there and
learn how it affects the body. Also, the Canadian Mental
Health Association speaks to how it
affects the mind. Here is the stress
assessment tool. If you can't open this link, just Google, what's
your stress index? When I hit on it here, you're going to see where the questions will pop-up
or you will type in, what's your stress
index in Google. You see these questions like, are you neglecting your diet? Do you seek unrealistic goal? Do you look to other people to make things happen for you? As you go on and hit yes or no, you then see what your score is. You're going to hit,
what's my score? Going back to the slides, I put a little music. You can listen to music, choose your own
music or this one. That is to encourage
music in anything you do. Filling out a form like that, you could be wrecking along as you're answering your questions, as simple as that. Or while you work
throughout the day, have music playing
in the background. Here, we're going to show you a little bit of the
biological basis of stress. Watch this. One little piece of paper can
have a remarkable effect. Stress is stressful. But if you understand a
bit about what it is, you'll be better able
to deal with it. First, though take
a few deep breaths. In fact, do that anytime you
feel stressed, it helps. Stress is a survival mechanism. When danger appears, it can get you out of trouble quickly. Your body crashes
up the gears and throws all its resources
into getting you moving. Your heart pumps furiously
to increase blood pressure, glucose is sent to the
muscles as fuel injection, and you become totally
focused on what psychologists call
fight or flight. The thing is, this
emergency state is only meant to last just long enough to get you out of danger. But here in the 21st century, we stress about
different things, and for much longer. Your brain and body stay on red alert and you'll be
less able to think clearly, learn, or remember things. Take a few more deep breaths
because, as you now know, stress is a physical
reaction and deep breathing helps to
counteract its effects. So what else can you do? Top tips to reduce stress. First, get plenty of exercise. Let out all that
locked-up energy. Now, back to the problem,
gets in control. Scope out the situation and how you're
going to tackle it. Don't stress alone,
talk to someone. Socialize and have a laugh. You can't laugh and quick
with fear at the same time. Get down with nature, on a big or small scale. If your mind won't
stop worrying, there is something
else to do instead. The video speaks to many
ways of coping with stress. One thing I want to hone in
on right away is that stress is a physical reaction and deep breathing can
counteract its effect. How to control stress
before it controls you, how do we do that? Several studies highlighted in Harvard Business
Review indicates that breathing exercises
are effective for immediate and long-term
stress reduction. I want to highlight a quick quote that I thought
was meaningful here. It says that "It's very
difficult to talk your way out of strong emotions like
stress, anxiety, or anger. Just think about how ineffective it is when a colleague tells you 'calm down' in a
moment of extreme stress. When we're in a highly
stressed state, our prefrontal
cortex, the part of our brain responsible for
rational thinking, is impaired. Logic seldom helps
to regain control. This can make it hard
to think straight or be emotionally intelligent with
your team or with someone. But with the
breathing techniques, it is possible to gain some
mastery over your mind." How does that work? How does breathing
calm you down? Try changing the ratio of
your inhale to exhale. When you inhale, your
heartbeat speeds up. When you exhale, it slows down. Breathing in a count of
four and breathing out with a count of eight can start
to calm your nervous system. Remember, when you
feel agitated, lengthening your exhale. Here is a structured approach. At the University
Health Network, we have this program
called BRITE, which is to help
build resilience, and it's a number of many
practices that staff can do on the go while
they work anytime. With a stop practice
here where you pause and take deep breaths. It's among 12
practices that we use. With this one, we could
try that tip that is shared on how we can use breathing to calm
our nervous system. Remember, it says,
"Breath in for four, and breathing in, you're going to inhale through your nose, and then breathing out." You're exhaling
through your mouth. That is four inhaling,
eight exhaling. Let's try that quickly here. That was four inhale,
eight exhale. Let's do it one more time. On this practice, it
acts that you observe your experience by becoming aware of your current thoughts, emotions, and body sensation. Think of how you can use this. There are tips provided
here when you're doing routine things
like washing your hands, turning on your computer, while you're waiting
for an elevator. You could do it just
before you go into a meeting that you're
worried or nervous about, and when you're in
stressful situations. Let's look at another
tip from the video. It says scope out the problem. I'm asking you to think of maybe something you
said yes when you did your stress index or maybe just something
you want to improve on. Then think of why it's stressing you and how you plan
to deal with it. When you think of what
will help to make you form this new habit or the
change that you want to make, start off with one
thing I would say, and then think of visual and auditory
cues that you can use, like an alarm, or note, or a buddy system, and then develop a
routine like a calendar. What I do, I have
a Pedometer for when I was trying to develop the habit of
walking regularly. Now I do that without thinking and it tells me
how many steps I made. I look forward at the end of each day to see how many steps, and then it reward me, because you know how we'd
have those little sprinkles, you may hear that sounds. I always look forward
to getting that. What tools are in your
self-care toolbox? Here, I use
three-dimensions of health. This is a list of
things that I do. Think of what you could fill in your self-care toolbox
if you didn't have one, or maybe you can add something else based
on this workshop. How are you coping
with stress again? Here are additional resources. I chose purposely something from the Center for
Disease Control and Prevention as that is that
important resource now, as we are in the pandemic or even once the pandemic subsided, we're still going to
be needing resources. They have a lot of useful tips. You can look at these stress
reduction strategies. Just before we end, I want you to practice
moving with music. You could do this sitting
down or you can stand up. Let's dance along and
listen to Sher Mclaughlin. She is delightful. It is sun shiny, Lovemore vibes, coming to
you from my bedroom window. Every day, as often as I can, I take many dance break
and I move with music. It helps me to de-stress, manage my days better, connect with my inner child. Listen, I deserve
all these happiness. I want to start
encouraging you no matter what your situation
or where you're at, I want you to find your
favorite music and move. Could be in the office, could be in a hospital bed, as long as you're
following doctor's orders. Could be in your car, could be at school,
wherever you are. In the kitchen, find
your spot and move, and groove, and
move, and groove. Until next time. Stay safe. Keep smiling, keep shining, and move and groove. Love you, guys. Let's look at what
we just discussed. Move with music, take
time to do self checking. Think of that stress
index and revisit it. Even you could just
memorize a few to always check
in with yourself. Self-check is a critical
component of self-management, so when you do that, you're taking care of yourself. Breathe in for four, breathe out for
eight. Thank you.
