Hello, everyone.
Steve Jordan's here. Again, just to give you
a sense of our plan, our devious plan for this course, every one of these modules
is going to begin with, Heather talking about something
that she is doing at UHN, and giving you some
ideas about some of the ways they're
helping people to deal, with the anxiety or
some of the lessons learned as they've dealt
with the anxiety of COVID. What I'm going to do is, watch Heather's part
along with you guys, and then pull out
certain things from there that I think could
use a little more emphasis, or where I think I can tell you about some general
psychological principle, and that if you understand that, then you can potentially use that principle in a
more general way, and come up with other
ways of potentially helping yourself or your
community handle anxiety. The first thing I want to do is revisit that notion
of what anxiety is. Heather showed a
little YouTube clip, and that I agree with
everything it said, but it was quick and, went through things in a minute, and heck, you guys are
health care people. I would like to just
go through that in a little bit more
detail in this video, give you a little bit more of the underlying
physiology and biology, and really make
sure that you have a good grasp on what anxiety is, because when you really
get a good feel for it, then when we talk
about these ways of managing it, they make sense. It just when you understand the whole story,
things make sense. Let's do the story. Here's my goals for this part to really tell
you what anxiety is, and why it evolved
through those together. I want to stress that
it's not a bad thing. We think of anxiety and this anxiety reaction
in a negative way. Because it doesn't feel
really comfortable, but it actually evolved
for a very good reason. It continues to be an extremely
useful response to have. The problem is in
some situations, COVID being one, but also
just general life situations. This response goes wrong
and leads to trouble. That's the story we want to
go through during this video. Let's start with these first two. What is anxiety, and
why did it evolve? Well, as you probably aware, when the brain or the
central nervous system, which we have depicted
in the middle here, the brain in the spinal cord, when it interacts with the body, it does so through the
peripheral nervous system, often by releasing hormones of various sorts that
activate or deactivate, certain muscles or
internal organs. When you look at the
pattern of how it does so, you realize that that the
brain actually supports two distinct modes of
being for your body. One that's happening
most of the time, and another one that's a special, I'm going to call
it superhero mode, because it's what it is. Let's get there and
let's start with the more common mode
that you're in, which I'm going to call
the rest and digest mode. Let's do this as a story. Let's go back to our
caveman days and say, you were out there
gathering fruit and so you're walking
through this wooded area. The sun is out, there's a
nice breeze, life is good. You are just taking your
time wandering through, looking for berries
or whatever it looks potentially edible,
and gathering them. During this time, you're probably pretty relaxed, probably chill. What we see is and we can point to a few things,
that are happening here. If we look at your
sensory organs and the eye is the best example, the pupils actually constrict. We can take from that
that you're not all that intensely focused
on the external world. You might be having some internal revelries
going on there, and you really half attending
to the world around you. It's not a priority at that time. Everything that you have,
every internal organ, especially that's involved in digestion, suddenly
becomes upregulated. That's right from
your saliva glands, back to your stomach, your intestines,
your gall bladder, all that stuff started
doing its thing. What is its thing
while it's taking the food that you've ingested, separating the nutrients
from the waste, eliminating the waste, and delivering the nutrients to
your muscles into your body. One way to think of
that is that it's worrying or focusing
on long-term survival. It's trying to keep your body physically
strong for the long term. We sometimes call
this rest and digest, because you're in a restful
state that's reflected, by the way, by the
fact that your heart is beating slower during this. Your lungs are breathing long, but slow breaths,
deep, but slow breath. You're just having these
deep, slow breathing, even your blood vessels
are constricted a little as you do this, so this is just all
part of relaxing. You are an a restful state, and your body is digesting. That's our typical default mode. However, we can get
kicked out of that mode into what is essentially
an opposite way of being. That'll be relevant,
a little later in the course to think of
these as opposites. But for now, let's just tell
the story a little more. You're gathering those things. Everything's going fine. From behind the bushes
comes a grizzly bear, a big scary bear. Your eyes take that input somewhere in the
middle of your brain. The limbic system, there's
something called the amygdala. Its job is to detect threats. When it detects threats to kick this peripheral nervous system, into the other mode
and that other mode, we colloquially call the
fight or flight mode. It's called the sympathetic mode. If you want to use real
peripheral nervous system terms. It is to some extent the
opposite of rest and digest. What do I mean by that? Well, if we look
again at the eyes, now the eyes are
dilated and in fact, the subjective experience is becoming hypersensitive
to the world around you. You sometimes hear
people say things like time slows down when
they're in this mode. Because they feel
like they're getting such rich information
from the external world. We're now prioritizing the external world like
there's a bear there. Where am I going to escape?
What's going to happen? We're paying a lot of attention. No internal rivalry anymore. We are fixated on what's
happening out there. All of our digestive organs down-regulate. It's
like, you know what? Forget about digestion right now. Forget about long-term survival. We've got a bear in front of us. We have to survive
this bear right now. It's all about
short-term survival. We see that also in
the following sense, the heart rate speeds up, the breathing rate speeds up, shallower, faster breaths,
sweat glands open, they release sweat and
our blood vessels dilate. What this is doing is
preparing us for action. The heart beating and the
lungs doing their thing. They're pumping oxygen-rich
blood to all of your muscles. That's what makes your
muscles super strong. In fact, even the blood vessels dilating,
they're helping. We're having very
efficient transportation of oxygen-rich blood, to our whole body. That's why it tingles
when we're anxious. By the way, and why
we're in this mode, we feel this tingly,
uncomfortable feeling. That's oxygen. That's the feeling of oxygen in your muscles. It gives us that tingly feeling. We would be sweating because, well, we're probably going to do one of two things as
highlighted in the right. We're probably either
going to choose to fight that bear that
just stepped out, or we're going to choose
to flee the bear. Sometimes we freeze
for a little bit. We had stuck between
these two options. Every now and then there
may be a freeze in there. But by and large, it resolves into a fight or a flee response. Notice that whichever of
these you're going to do, you need all the muscle
strength you have. If you're going to
fight that bear, you'd better be
ready for the fight. If you're going to flee, you'd better be
ready to run fast, and you will run your fastest. You will be your strongest. That's why I say this is
actually a good thing. When we're in those
emergency situations, when we're in those life
and death situations, we want that strength. We want that power. That's what's going
to help us survive. That's what it evolved to do. We know stories like this where theoretically
this woman's father, theoretically, according to this, it's true, her father
was trapped under a car and normally
a girl probably, wouldn't have the
strength to lift a car. But when she senses that threat, and it doesn't have to
be a threat to her. It can be a threat to her
father, a personal threat. But when she senses
that sympathetic nodes, sympathetic nervous
system kicks in, she has all the strength and she can use it to do something
like lift the car, so they can get her father out. Very cool. We should be
happy to have the system. What's the problem? Well, the problem is this. This reaction evolved
to deal with what we call acute stressors
like the bear, a stressor that shows
up and threatens us. But then once we
either fight or flee, it's gone or we're
gone, if the bear wins, but assuming we survive it, then we've either
successfully fought the bear. He's no longer a problem or we've successfully escaped the bear. Either way, after a
short period of time, the drama is over and we can return to
rest and relax mode. That is how this system
was meant to function. This was the world
that evolved in, a world where most of the
stressors were acute. There for a moment had to be
dealt with and then gone. The modern world includes a
lot of chronic stressors, and that's when things
become problematic. Yes, it could be a bad
relationship or a stressful job. I don't have to tell you
guys about stressful jobs. That stressful job is
stressful day in, and day out. If you don't learn how to give yourself a break from
this anxiety reaction, you can end up in a continual
fight or flight mode. Maybe not full-blown
fight or flight, but that wins, and so that you feel real
anxious all the time. That's bad news, is bad news
for a number of reasons. If we look over
here for a moment, you look at stress, severity, or duration, we actually
like a little bit of stress, a little bit of stress is good. It gets us to our optimal
level of performance. But if that stress is too much
or continues for too long, our performance
starts to decline, and we just become
tired, really exhausted. We have trouble thinking
deep, complex thoughts. Worse than that, if it
continues long enough, there are actual physical
implications as well. This is the work of
conciliating in Montreal. One example is our immune
systems become compromised. Suddenly you become
susceptible to any viruses, and such that might be out there. A highly stressed person
often ends up being physically ill in some way.
This is not a good thing. If you do have a
chronically stressful job, then this is a danger for you. That's really why we've
created this course. Now that you understand what this response is and understand, that it's not good to just let it go unbridled for too long. Now, we can start to talk about, well, what can you do about it? The good news is there are
things you can do about it. Yes, the response is primitive. Yes, it will keep happening. It will keep coming back. But that doesn't
mean it has to be allowed to just continue
humming along all the time. You can find ways to
escape this feeling, in some of the ways
to escape will actually counteract the
negative effects of stress. We're going to talk about all of those things in this context. I just wanted to begin again with this really strong sense of the anxiety response,
and what it is. Then we will go from here. Just to be uplifting
the next one, let's talk about
some of that music and dancing stuff that
Heather was doing, at the end of her video
and talk about why, that can have such powerful mojo from a psychological sense. All right. See you in
the next video. Bye.