If you look at the rules governing
the conduct of hostilities, you will notice that many
of the treaty provisions, particularly those codified in API
apply to international armed conflict. However, this does not mean
that civilians lack protection in in non-international armed conflicts,
also called NIACs. Common Article 3 and the provisions of Additional Protocol
II which are the main legal regimes governing NIAC build upon the same
fundamental rule of limited warfare, namely distinction, proportionality,
precautions and unnecessary suffering as found in the Geneva Convention's
in API for international conflicts. Nevertheless, the treaty body
of IHL applicable to NIACs is observably much more limited and not as detailed as the treaty law
governing international conflicts. As a result, a number of specific
weapons prohibitions, for instance, only apply to NIACs by a means
of customary international law. Furthermore, there is one important
difference between the rules governing IACs and NIACs. The state parties to the Geneva Conventions
that are bound by Common Article 3 and also those which supported APII have
not expressed a willingness to grant the combatant privilege to
so-called fighters who are acting against a state's armed forces. As a result, combatant status
does not exist in a NIAC and instead the national
laws of a state apply. Therefore, fighters who
conduct hostilities and in this context kill soldiers may
be prosecuted after the war for such offences under the penal
code of the respective state. This might lead to the situation that they
are indicted for murder or manslaughter. Fighters can be members of
organized armed groups and can accordingly be lawfully attacked
at any time in the same way as combatants may be attacked in
an international conflict. Civilians like in an international
conflict remain protected from the dangers arising from war. However, there's one exception
to this civilian protection. If civilians take up arms, then they
can lose their civilian protection for such time as they take
a direct part in hostilities. During this time,
they may be lawfully attacked. For NIACs,
this rule is found in customary IHL and codified in both Common Article 3 and
Article 13, paragraph 3 of APII. So how do we define direct
participation in hostilities or DPH? The relevant treaty law does not provide a
definition and in the absence of a clear agreement on this subject, the
International Committee of the Red Cross has published an interpretive guidance
document on the notion of DPH. This guidance document identifies
three requirements that a specific act must meet in order to mount to
direct participation in hostilities. First, the act must result in
a minimum threshold of harm. This means that the act
must be likely to adversely affect the military operations or
capacity of a party to the armed conflict. As an alternative,
it can inflict death, injury or destruction on persons or
objects protected against direct attack. Second, there must be a direct
causal link between the act and the harm likely to result,
either from that act or from a coordinated military operation
where the act is an integral part. Third, there must be a belligerent nexus. In other words, the act must be
specifically designed to directly cause the required threshold of harm in
support of a party to the conflict and to the detriment of another. In summary, acts supporting an organized
armed group that is party to a NIAC and that directly harm the enemy,
for instance, inflicting death can amount to DPH. Acts which fall short of the threshold
of DPH include, for example, merely funding an organized armed group or
helping them to produce a weapon. Finally, we would like to discuss
the situation in which civilians are not merely fighting sporadically, but when
they are doing so on a continuous basis. In this case, civilians are considered
to be carrying out what is known as a continuous combat function for
an organized group. As a result, these civilians are regarded
as members of that armed group and are consequently legitimate
military targets. However, like the members of these
armed groups, civilians fulfilling a continuous combat function are not
entitled to the privilege of a combatant. To conclude this lecture,
the fundamental rules of limited warfare, distinction, proportionality and precautions as well as the prohibition
of superfluous injury and unnecessary suffering are applicable to NIACs
the same way as international conflicts. One important difference, nevertheless is that fighters in NIACs
do not receive combatant privilege. Furthermore, as in international
armed conflict, civilians in NIACs who do not take a direct part
in hostilities remain protected.