Welcome to this Massive Open Online
Course on International Humanitarian Law in Theory and Practice. My name is Robert Heinsch and
I'm currently a Visiting Professor for International Humanitarian
Law at the Institute for International Law of Peace and Armed
Conflict at Bochum University in Germany. In addition, I'm an Associate
Professor of Public International Law at the Grotius Center for International Legal Studies of Leiden
University in the Netherlands. And the Director of
its Kalshoven-Gieskes Forum on International Humanitarian Law. Furthermore, I am the founder of both
the Leiden and Bochum Clinics which enable bachelor and master students
to apply theoretical knowledge to practical assignments provided to us
by actors from the humanitarian field, including the International
Committee of the Red Cross, National Red Cross societies,
and a number of human rights NGOs. For the last 20 years, I have
dedicated my professional career and private life to the study,
research, teaching, and dissemination of international
humanitarian law. I have had the opportunity to work in
both practice and academia, including at the International Criminal Court in
the Hauge, the Red Cross Headquarters in Berlin, and at the University of Bochum,
Leiden, and Cologne. Together with my colleagues, Dr. Giulia
Pinzauti and Dr. Emma Irving, I would like to introduce you to one of the most
important legal regimes of modern times: International Humanitarian Law,
also known as the Law of Armed Conflict. For the next five weeks, we will embark upon a journey across
the globe looking at past conflicts, such as the 2nd World War and a series
of conflicts in the former Yugoslavia, as well as current situations including
the occupation of the West Bank and the conflict in eastern Ukraine. You will be exposed to some of the darkest
practices in the history of war which have also resulted in the death
of thousands of civilians. Like for example, the use of napalm in
the Vietnam War, the aerial bombardment of a funeral in Yemen, and
the use of chemical weapons in Syria. Among others, we will look
into the following questions. What does IHL say about the use of
certain weapons and methods of warfare? And what are the consequences
of engaging is such a behavior? Perhaps you have also heard in
the news about the imprisonment of alleged terrorists in Guantanamo Bay. And the hospital attack in
Kabul, Afghanistan, which seems to have hit indiscriminately also doctors as
well as sick and wounded soldiers. In the coming weeks you will discover:
To which situations does IHL apply? How does IHL afford
protection to victims of war? Which persons are protected
by this legal regime? And, how can we actually implement and
enforce IHL? In order to provide you with
the answers to these questions, we have designed this MOOC
with five separate modules. In the current module you will get a short
introduction to the basic concepts and the history of IHL. In the second module you will learn
about conflict classification. As such you will become familiar with
the different types of armed conflict and you will understand in which situations
international humanitarian law applies. The third module of this course will focus
on the conduct of hostilities under IHL. We will examine which weapons soldiers and
commanders are allowed to use and how they should conduct
military operations. The fourth module is devoted to the study
of protected persons under IHL. Here we will see how the sick and
wounded, detainees, civilians in occupied territories,
women, children, and other groups of vulnerable
persons are protected. Especially by the Four Geneva Conventions. Finally, in module five we will delve into
the implementation and enforcement of IHL, and discover how compliance with IHL
can be guaranteed, and promoted. In our MOOC, you will benefit from
a combination of theory and practice, that is at the heart of
the mandate and vision of the KGF. We will teach you the foundations of
IHL through a series of video clips. Afterwards, you will have
the chance to apply and test your legal knowledge
through various quizzes and an ongoing case study involving
the fictitious country of Arfula. We would also like to share success
stories as well as challenges of IHL application with you and
who’s better equipped to do so than experts in the field. In each module, you will therefore
be able to listen to interviews with our distinguished colleagues from the
International Committee of the Red Cross, the Netherlands Red Cross, the US Naval
War College, the University of Glasgow, as well as the University of Leiden. So please join us on our journey through
this first MOOC on International Humanitarian Law in Theory and Practice!