In the history of warfare, the use of weapons, like napalm, expanding or dumdum bullets, and chemical weapons have had devastating effects on entire regions, in for example, Vietnam and Syria, and has led to the suffering and death of thousands of people. Because of their enormous humanitarian consequences, certain types of weapons used in armed conflict have been either restricted or prohibited by IHL. These weapons are also referred to as the means of warfare and are guided by the same fundamental principles of IHL as the methods of warfare. In this lecture, we will focus in particular on the prohibition of superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering, and the prohibition of indiscriminate attacks. Allow me to first introduce you to the prohibition of superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering, which is crucial in deciding whether the use of certain weapon is prohibited under IHL. The prohibition, which is laid down in Article 35, paragraph 2 of Additional Protocol I, prohibits parties to a conflict from employing weapons, projectiles, and material, and methods of warfare which are of a nature to cause superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering. Consequently, IHL restricts or prohibits certain weapons which cause severe injury to soldiers and civilians and which are at the same time unnecessary to win the war. The term superfluous injury and unnecessary suffering are relatively broad. So it is important for the purpose of understanding, to define them in greater detail. What do these terms mean exactly? Given the absence of a treaty-based definition, many states have accepted that a balance must be struck between military necessity and considerations of humanity when answering this question. The International Court of Justice affirmed this approach in its nuclear weapons Advisory Opinion. According to the court, it's unlawful to cause harm to combatants, which is greater than that unavoidable to achieve legitimate military objectives. Weapons that would cause unnecessary suffering or superfluous injury include, for instance, those with exploding or expanding bullets, such as dum dum bullets. These bullets are designed to expand upon impact and to increase in size to produce a larger wound for faster incapacitation. While some of these means of warfare have also been restricted or prohibited by treaties created specifically for this purpose, such as the Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons or the Convention on Anti Personal Mines, it is important to note that such weapons would already be banned under the general prohibition to cause unnecessary suffering or superfluous injury. We will now turn to another core principle governing the conduct of hostilities. The prohibition of indiscriminate attacks, which is closely connected to the principle of distinction. Indiscriminate attacks are those which cannot be directed at specific military objectives. Article 51, paragraph 4 of API, provides that weapons which cannot be directed at specific military objectives and which consequently strike military objectives and civilians without distinction are indiscriminate and therefore prohibited. This includes weapons which are expected to cause excessive collateral damage as specified in paragraph 5 of Article 51. A clear example of an indiscriminate weapon is a landmine, which can be triggered by either a civilian or a combatant without being able to distinguish between the two. The prohibition of superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering on the one hand and the provision of indiscriminate weapons on the other operate as independent principles. Nevertheless, it can be challenging to reach a consensus on which specific weapons breach IHL, since the underlying principles that we have discussed are formulated rather broadly and leave for certain discretion to the person applying the law. Thus, numerous conventions which explicitly restrict or prohibit specific weapons have been adopted by states. Therefore, there is no doubt as to whether these weapons are prohibited. These specific treaties regulate both conventional weapons such as small arms and light weapons, as well as weapons of mass destruction, such as chemical, biological and nuclear weapons. The use of conventional weapons in the conduct of hostilities is regulated specifically by the 1980 Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons and it's five Additional Protocols, as well as several other specific weapon conventions like the Convention on Cluster Munitions. The regulation of weapons of mass destruction on the other hand is slightly more nuanced. Weapons of mass destruction can cause enormous numbers of casualties while also destroying entire cities or natural structures like mountains and forests. As a result of the severe consequences, states have explicitly prohibited the use of chemical and biological weapons in separate conventions. The Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological Weapons Convention, both state that the conflicting parties shall never under any circumstances make use of chemical and biological weapons in the conduct of hostilities, thus, the prohibition is absolute. Nuclear weapons, however, have not yet been expressly banned by any treaty in spite of the devastating humanitarian consequences that they can have. With this said, there has nevertheless been a recent move towards a ban. Namely, in July 2017, the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons was signed. Still, this treaty has not entered into force and as such it is not yet legally binding. But does this lack of regulation mean that parties to an armed conflict can always lawfully resort to nuclear weapons? Most definitely not. In the majority of cases, the use of nuclear weapons would foreseeably violate the principles of distinction and proportionality as well as the provision of superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering. The same view was shared by the International Court of Justice in its nuclear weapons advisory opinion. Nonetheless, it should be noted that the court did not reach a definite conclusion as to the legality or illegality of the use of nuclear weapons by a state in an extreme circumstance of self-defense, in which its very survival would be at stake. Finally, we would like to address new weapons technologies. You may wonder, for instance, how IHL can respond to the rapid development of armed drones, autonomous weapons, and cyber-warfare. Article 36 API, which is considered by some commentators to reflect customary law, obliges state parties to conduct a legal review of new weapons. The development and use of new weapons must be restricted or prohibited, if the expected use is not capable of complying with the rules of IHL. This of course also includes the principles mentioned earlier, such as the prohibition of superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering. At present, drones and autonomous weapons are not explicitly prohibited by IHL, and there's an ongoing debate as to whether they would be able to comply with the most fundamental rules of IHL. To summarize, weapons may only be used in armed conflict when they do not violate any of the general IHL principles on the conduct of hostilities including the prohibition to cause superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering or the principle of distinction. This also means that they always need to distinguish correctly between civilians and civilian objects on the one hand and military objectives on the other.