During armed conflict, civilian objects such as schools, hospitals and houses might be closely located to military objectives like tanks and military barracks, especially since warfare is now often waged in populated urban areas. As such, attacking a military barrack might also result in the destruction of an adjacent school, for instance, leading to the loss of civilian lives. Therefore, the fact that a military objective has been identified as such in accordance with the principle of distinction is not enough to limit human suffering as much as possible. With this in mind, we might wonder: How are the warring parties required to respond to such situations? Allow me to introduce you to two important principles for the conduct of hostilities, the principle of proportionality and the principle of precautions. These two principles have been built upon the rule of limited warfare and the principle of distinction and further restrict the means and methods of warfare in order to spare the civilian population from the consequences of war. Both principles are considered to form part of customary international law. We will begin by looking at the principle of proportionality. Under this principle, a lawful attack against a combatant or a military objective must always be proportionate to the aim it seeks to accomplish in relation to the possible resulting civilian damage. Thus Article 51, paragraph five API prohibits attacks which may be expected to cause incidental loss of civilian life, injury to civilians, damage to civilian objects or a combination thereof, which would be excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated. Put simply, the proportionality principle requires that damage caused to civilians by a military attack also known as collateral damage must not be excessive. But when is collateral damage excessive? IHL does not provide an objective threshold above which collateral damage would be excessive such as for example, a certain number of civilian victims. Rather, the reasonable commander on the ground must make a judgment based upon the circumstances ruling at the time. Why this judgment is therefore partially subjective, IHL does indeed provide a few objective guidelines. For instance, the military advantage gained by the attack must be concrete and direct and not just hypothetical. Also, military advantage must result from a specific operation rather than from the war as a whole. But as you can see the principle for proportionality is not easy to apply in practice and puts a lot of responsibility on the reasonable commander. We will now turn to the principle of precautions. According to this principle, in the conduct of military operations, constant care must be taken to spare the civilian population, civilians and civilian objects. As such, those who plan or decide upon an attack shall take all feasible precautions in the choice of means and methods of attack with a view to avoiding and in any event minimizing incidental loss of civilian life, injury to civilians and damage to civilian objects. We can find this principle of precautions in Article 57, paragraph 1 and paragraph 2 both of which reflect customary international law. But what do we mean by feasible precautions? Well, feasible refers to those measures which are practicable taking into account all circumstances at the time. On a more concrete level, Additional Protocol I provides that precautionary measures must be taken by both the attacking party and the attacked party. With respect to the attacking party, the precautionary measures must be taken before an attack and during an attack. Before an attack, those who plan and decide upon the attack must do everything feasible to verify that their targets are military and not civilian in nature. Furthermore, those who plan the attack must assess whether the attack would cause excessive collateral damage according to the principle of proportionality. If it would, they must refrain from attacking. Finally, prior to an attack the attacking party must give effective advance warnings to the civilian population if they may be affected by the attack. This can be done for example, by dropping warning leaflets from an aircraft or by sending warning messages to mobile phones or over the internet. During an attack, the attacking party is obliged to cancel or suspend the attack if the target was at first mistakenly identified as being military in nature and the attacker then realizes that it is actually not. Similarly, an attack that is being carried out must be canceled or suspended if the collateral damage that it is causing appears to be more significant than originally anticipated. Otherwise, the attack would violate the principle of proportionality. Turning now to the obligations of the attacked party. Which precautionary measures must this side take against the effects of the attack? The attacked party is obliged to the maximum extent feasible to take measures to protect the civilian population, under their control, against military attacks from the enemy. As such, the attacked party must remove the civilian population under their control from the vicinity of military objectives such as military headquarters or barracks. Further, they must avoid locating military objectives within or near densely populated areas such as city centers. Finally, the attacked party must take other precautions to protect the civilian population where necessary. Examples of such precautions include creating shelters and safe places, distributing information about expected attacks, and evacuating civilians. To summarize. In this lecture we have seen that the principles of proportionality and precautions further restrict the way in which hostilities can be conducted by the parties to a conflict. In order to minimize the effects of war, the warring parties should ensure that an attack does not cause excessive collateral damage. Armed forces must also plan military operations carefully, inform the civilian populations about their planned attacks, and take other precautionary measures to protect civilians and civilian objects in armed conflict.