Welcome to this module on the Conduct of Hostilities, where we will introduce you to the legal regime governing the means and methods of warfare. In this module, you will become familiar with some of the core rules of IHL regulating the conduct of hostilities, including the principles of distinction, proportionality, and precautions, and the prohibition of unnecessary suffering. You will learn how armed conflict should be waged to comply with IHL and which types of weapons are prohibited. Before we delve into the law, let us first consider one specific area of the means and methods of warfare and look at its impact on combatants and civilians in armed conflict, namely the development of new weapons technologies. As the first example of this area, we will be looking at incidents in which the United States Air Force has targeted terrorist suspects in Northwest Pakistan with unmanned aerial vehicles, UAVs, also commonly known as armed drones. News reports suggest that since 2004 until today, more than 400 US drone strikes have been conducted in Pakistan alone, leading to the deaths of an estimated 2000-4000 people. Yet investigative journalists have argued that more civilians than terrorist suspects have been actually killed by these armed drones. Report published by the Law Clinics of Stanford University and NYU have presented a detailed picture of the impact of drone strikes in Pakistan. Also, the drone strikes led to various protests by the civilian population. The use of such drones has also been observed in other countries, including Yemen, and many states such as France, Israel, and the Netherlands have been developing their drone capacities. Another example of our specific area of warfare goes back to 2008, when Russia allegedly launched a series of cyber attacks against Georgian websites. The cyber attacks were conducted during the Russian-Georgian War over disputed territory in South Ossetia and occurred alongside military bombardment. Russia was accused of spreading so-called fake news, as well as propaganda through official and commercial channels as part of the cyber attacks. For example, the Georgian president at the time was likened to Adolf Hitler on the Georgian parliament website. Several governmental and commercial news websites were also taken down after Russian and Georgian forces clashed in August 2008. Thereby, preventing Georgia from publishing reports on and inform its citizens about the war over South Ossetia. But Georgia is not the only alleged victim of cyber operations. Cyber attacks have also been reported in countries such as Germany, Iran, and Lithuania. A third example of new weapons technologies being used involves what the media has come to refer to as killer robots. By 2016, China, for instance, had already purportedly began testing autonomous weapons systems on land, in the air, and at sea. The US, UK, South Korea, and Israel seem also to be in the process of developing and using machines with greater combat autonomy. In response to the potential future production of these autonomous weapons systems by nations with high-tech militaries, a coalition of NGOs have launched the Campaign to Stop Killer Robots. This campaign seeks to preemptively ban fully lethal autonomous weapons for reasons including the lack of human control over these systems, as well as the inability of the weapons to understand the contextual nuances often found in contemporary armed conflict. By way of example, there is concern that lethal autonomous weapons could not comply with the principle of distinction or carry out an assessment of proportionality for military attack. These are just a few examples of new weapons that have been developed and that are being used or will be used during armed conflicts in the near future. Such weapons will continue to challenge how IHL protects victims of war. Looking at these examples, I assume that you are now curious as to how IHL can provide guidance for the development of new weapons and other means and methods of warfare. Would you like to learn more about the principles of distinction, proportionality, and precautions, and the prohibition of unnecessary suffering? Then please join us now for the rest of our module on the conduct of hostilities.