Up to this day, the conduct of hostilities
has brought terrible suffering to mankind. Thousands of combatants and fighters have
been traumatized, injured, or killed. Civilians have lost their belongings,
their loved ones, and their lives. For more than 100 years, IHL has
therefore had the primary objective to regulate the conduct of hostilities and
to minimize the suffering caused by war. As a result, IHL has developed an
extensive body of rules on the means and methods of warfare. The means of warfare refer to the types
of weapons that are developed, possessed and used during armed conflict. The methods of warfare,
on the other hand, concerns specific ways in which such weapons are used or
in which hostilities can be conducted. IHL either restricts or prohibits
certain means and methods of warfare on the basis of the long standing
rule of limited warfare which rejects total war by providing the following and
I quote, the right of the Parties to the conflict to choose methods or
means of warfare is not unlimited. This rule reflects the basic idea
underlying IHL that any act of war must balance the concerns of
humanity on the one hand, and military necessity on the other hand. The rule of limited warfare was initially
qualified in Article 22 of the 1907 Hague regulations. And later, restated in Article 35, paragraph 1 of the 1977 Additional
Protocol I (API). API  applies to international conflicts
and is to date ratified by 174 states. The rule undisputedly forms part
of customery international law. There are a few important principles which
follow from this rejection of total war, namely, those of distinction,
proportionality, and precautions, and the prohibition of unnecessary suffering. Many other rules are built upon
these fundamental principles. In this lecture, we will examine the principle of
distinction in greater detail. According to the principle of distinction, the parties to the conflicts must at all
times distinguish between civilians and combatants, and between civilian
objects and military objectives. Attacks may only be directed against
combatants and military objectives. Thus, in general, it is prohibited to carry out attacks
against civilians and civilian objects. The aim of this principle
is to protect the civilian population from the dangers
arising from military operations. The principle is codified in Article 48,
and Article 51, paragraph 2, as well as Article 52,
paragraph 2 of API. This rule is also considered to form
part of customary international law. Thus, now that we have established
that the parties to a conflict must distinguish at all time between
civilians and combatants and between civilian objects and
military objectives, it is important to explore what
these terms actually mean. So how do we define combatants? Combatants are described
by Additional Protocol I as the members of the armed forces of
a party to an international armed conflict with the exception of medical and
religious personnel. Equally, Article 4A,
paragraph 1 of the third Geneva Convention defines Prisoners of War as members
of the armed forces of a party to the conflict as well as members of
militias and volunteer corps forming part of such armed forces who have
fallen into the hands of the enemy. However, IHL recognizes that the
rights and duties of war do not only apply to the regular armed forces, but
can extend to other organized armed groups in an international armed conflict,
such as militias or volunteer corps. Members of these other organized armed
groups also receive combatant status provided that they fulfill
the following four conditions, assimilating them to
the regular armed forces. First, they need to be commanded by
a person responsible for his subordinates. Second, they need to have a fixed
distinctive sign recognizable at a distance. Third, they need to carry arms openly and
fourth, they must conduct their operations in accordance
with words of IHL. There are three legal consequences for combatants that result
from their combatant status. First, as follows from
the principles of distinction, combatants are legitimate
military objectives or targets, meaning that they may be lawfully attacked
at any time during armed conflict. Second, combatants enjoy
combatant privilege, which means that they have the right to
use lawful means and methods of warfare. They can thus directly
participate in hostilities without facing criminal prosecution. Finally, and thirdly, combatants who fall into the hands of the
enemy are entitled to Prisoner of War status. We have now looked at what it
means to be a combatant, but how do we define the term civilians? API provides a negative
definition of civilians. In other words, it states that civilians
are persons who are not combatants. In case of doubt about
the person's status, that person must be considered a civilian. Civilians are protected by
the principal of distinction. And as a result, they may not be
attacked by the parties to a conflict. However, exceptionally,
they may be attack for such time as they take a direct
part in hostilities. We will discuss this exception
in greater detail in our lecture on non-international armed conflicts. Now that we have discussed the meaning
of the terms combatant and civilian, we will consider the concept of civilian
objects and military objectives. What are military objectives? An object must meet two cumulative
criteria to qualify as a military objective pursuant to Article 52,
paragraph 2 of Additional Protocol I, which reflects customary IHL. First, an item must contribute effectively
to the enemy's military action. It has to do so by its nature,
location, purpose, or current use. Second, the destruction, capture,
or neutralization of such an object must offer the attacker
a definite military advantage in the sense that the military advantage
must be concrete and perceptible. Examples of military objectives
are buildings and positions where enemy combatants and their material and weapons
are located, such as Military barracks. Other examples include military means
of transportation, like tanks or fighter jets, and means of communication
such as broadcasting stations, although the latter depends
on contextual factors. But which objects are civilian in nature? Like civilians, civilian objects
are also negatively defined and encompass all objects
which are not military. This straightforward definition has
the advantage that it eliminates the possibility of a further category
of objects thereby leaving no room for doubt as to whether an object
can be attacked or not. Generally, cities, residential areas,
buildings, houses, schools, hospitals, and historic monuments are among
others considered as civilian objects. So why again is the distinction
between civilians and combatants as well as between civilian objects and
military objectives important to us? As we already noted in API, the principle
of distinction prohibits, first and foremost, direct attacks against
civilians and civilian objects. But another prohibition derived from
the principle of distinction is the prohibition of indiscriminate
attacks as found in Article 51, Paragraph 4 of API. And this includes attacks which cannot be
directed at specific military objectives. Consequently, they strike military
objectives and civilians and civilian objects without distinction. Examples of indiscriminate attacks are
listed in Article 51, paragraph 5 of API, and include for instance,
an attack by bombardment, which treats as a single military objective,
a number of clearly separated and distinct military objectives located in
the city, town, village, or other area containing a similar concentration
of civilians, or civilian objects. To conclude this lecture, in order to protect victims
of war as much as possible, there are restrictions placed upon the
weapons that are used in armed conflict, the ways in which these
weapons are used and the manner in which
hostilities can be conducted. Regarding the letter, it is crucial to
always distinguish between combatants and civilians, and between civilian
objects and military objectives.