Hello, my name is
Heather Gordon, I'm the workplace
Wellness Manager for University Health
Network and I'm pleased to be a part
of this process, to provide useful
and tangible tools to help you cope during
these challenging times. Though you may be seeing this video when the
pandemic subsides, but I imagine the aftermath
will have its own issues. You'll be hearing about some of the things that we're
doing for staff at University Health Network
as well as some of my own personal resources that I use for my
own well-being. I'll let you take over, Doctor. Cool. My name is
Professor Steve Joordens. I teach a lot of
psychology courses at U of T and also in Coursera, which is an online platform. Well, you know
what, you're here. This is one of those courses, and I do have the
real pleasure of working here with
Dr. Heather Gordon. As she suggested, this is a lessons learned from COVID because as we all
went through COVID, first of all, I need to say
to all of you, thank you. On behalf of all of us
non-medical professionals, you guys were the heroes, are the heroes of the pandemic. You went through
stress at a level you've probably never experienced
before and certainly, the system hasn't
experienced before. As Heather suggested,
our goal in creating this course was to take some
of those lessons learned. What was tried
during the pandemic, what seemed to be an
effective practice? We want to translate those so that they can become
useful even when it's not a pandemic
because your job is stressful all the
time, pandemic or not. We've laid out this course in a certain way where I'm
the psychology guy, I know the theory. Heather's on the ground. She lives what you
guys are experiencing. Each module will begin
a little bit with her describing her
experience and then maybe you could just
give them an example. I don't know, maybe
with the first module, the kind of thing. That's what to expect. Yes, we do have activities to help stop and becoming
small increments. You'll see that my
videos are 10-30 minutes long because our activities are generally short for staff. You just take a break from their regular duties and just be refreshed
with an activity. For example, the first one
is refreshment stress, and within that activity, you'll do mini activities to uplift your spirit
like I have move with music and I do have laughter yoga as well
as gratitude practice. I hope you will enjoy. Fantastic. That'll be the idea. Heather will talk about
something that she does with people to help them
manage their stress. What I'm going to do
is I'm going to then follow up her videos. She's the star. Yes, you are. Every module we'll start with something that Heather has been doing actively to
help the staff at UHN. Then what I'm going to do is I'm just going to give
you a little bit of psychology behind some
of those practices, a little bit more of the
academic theory as it were. Because sometimes,
those practices are instances of a
more general rule. If you understand that
more general rule, you can maybe think of
other things you could do that would probably
work as well. You'll get this mix of concrete. These are things that are being done with a little
bit of abstract. Here's how it works,
here's why it works. That's our goal. The hope is, after
you go through this, you will be armed either
at a personal level, if you just want to get a better control of
managing your own anxiety, but also potentially at
an institutional level, if you are someone like Heather, charged with managing the
wellness of so many people. What are things you might
do institutionally to help? That's our goal. I hope you'll find it really
enjoyable as you go through. There are little
quizzes throughout. Just to be explicit, you do not have to pay anything for access
to this course. You can go through it and
learn everything you want. You will get prompted
from Coursera every now and then to see if you want to purchase a certificate. You do not have to
purchase a certificate. If you wish to, I think there's a charge of $60-$100 or something like that. Then at the end of the course, if you've passed the quizzes, you get a certificate you
can proudly show off. For some people,
that's very valuable, for other people,
it's the learning. Whatever works for
you is great with us. For me, it's just
been a pleasure to work with Heather
throughout all of this. I really hope you
enjoy the course. Any last words before we send them to the
course, Heather? Yes. I really enjoy
this activity with you, Dr. Joorden, and I hope you
enjoy and just have fun. Even for the laughter activity, get your props out. Put on your costume and
just emerge yourself in it. Fantastic, Great.
Good luck, everybody. We'll be on the other end is what will be all
through the course, but will be on the
other end as well. We'll see you there. Thank you for
choosing the course. I really hope you
find it valuable.