Hey already. Yeah, gratitude. The topic of the module and
it's a very powerful force and and really Heather's talked a lot
about how gratitude plays a role within healthcare institutions. And both in terms of sort of gratitude
walls like health providers, seeing how grateful others are for
what they do, but also to take the time yourself and spend some time
thinking what you're grateful for. Very cool, why is it work like,
what's it about? That's what I hope to touch on in my two
little videos that that will take off from it. So I'm going to start here with
a little help from my friends. So the implication being we're going
to talk a lot about social networks and social connectivity. I actually think there's two
things when we think of gratitude, there's sort of two powerful sort of
forces kind of combined into one. I'm going to talk about the social force
in this one, and I will talk about what I'll call the framing or
the reweighting force in the next one. But for here, I want to focus on
those times when the gratitude in question Is from
a one person to another. For example, the gratitude wall of people
reaching out to you guys and saying, hey, we're grateful for what you do. Or potentially, you sitting and
thinking, wow, I'm really grateful for the support of my colleagues. For me, for example, I am really grateful
to have this opportunity to create this course with Heather. Somebody I probably normally would
not have had a chance to have a deep interaction with. But we've had months of
interactions over this course and I have a real sense of what she does and
how important that is. And I'm really grateful she's been able to
find the time given everything she's doing to help contribute to that course. So if this course, so
if you think of that sort of gratitude, that's a person to person and that's
part of what makes gratitude powerful. So I want to take a little bit of time to
walk through this social kind of aspect of things. When we think about our social lives, our friends are close
friends are family etcetera. We have a lot of fun with them and
we think of that. There's great activities we do together
and that's often are sort of first thought about friends and social interactions
is going out and doing fun things. But in fact our social networks those
people we feel strongly connected to. And let me be clear when
I say social network, I do not mean the number of
friends you have on Facebook. I mean the number of friends you
have where if you called them and said I really need to talk. Can you take an hour from your day and spend it with me helping
me work through a problem. How many of your friends would say yes
those are your close close friends. And really that scenario is the one I
want to highlight because while friends are really important when times are good,
they're really, really important when times are bad. Let me kind of show you this story. What is this picture? Well, in Toronto Ontario a little
while ago, we had some dude who got a rental van and
drove down one of our busiest streets, Yonge street on the sidewalk
running over people as he did. It's called the so
called Yonge street van attack. And this guy was angry at women and he wanted to kill as many women
as possible, horrible event. When events like that happened our
first reaction is always horror, disgust anger sometimes, but very quickly that resolves to
more what you're seeing here. And this is what happened not
long after the van attack. And what you almost always see
is the community in question pulling together and
you see things like this. This is the ultimate sort of
realization of our social need when we are feeling threatened
when we're feeling sad. When we're feeling grief any of those
negative emotions hug is what we need. What is going on with that hug. That's that other person saying,
hey, I'm here and I care, right? It's that connection to be there and
to care. And very often after traumatic events,
communities come together and share that energy with one another. Sometimes combined with a this is
not this event is not who we are. So a reaffirmation of the community,
a strengthening of the community, literally, people coming together. Those social interactions help us
get through these tough times. This is our go to strategy. This is our natural tendency when
times are tough, we want a hug. If it's not a literal hug, at least
the psychological hug of connecting with somebody who cares about us and
sharing a warmth with one another. It's a really critical coping mechanism
of course, during Covid, one of the nasty things is it really got in the way
of this coping mechanism, right? It did not allow us to hug and that became
a source of stress in and of itself. For now, let's just think of how
powerful this is as a force to combat negative emotional states. There's something else I want to highlight
about social connections too and I want to bring these two things together. This is when you probably never
would have thought of, but it's really, really critical. Let's imagine,
let's say in a normal world, normal times, if we think of
a normal time you are out there and anywhere from people you interact
with that stores gas stations. Maybe the doorman or
janitorial staff where you work all the interactions
you have through a day. Maybe imagine going to a restaurant, you interact with people at the restaurant
etcetera, etcetera, etcetera. How many interactions did we
have in those normal days? Probably quite a few,
probably 5-25 different people we interacted with at some point in time. And there's this notion of what's
called the looking glass self and what it suggests is that every
time you interact with somebody. They reflect a little piece of how they
see you through their nonverbal behavior, through how they talk to you. They give you a sense if they
think you're intelligent, do they think you're creative? Do they think you're attractive? Do they think you're trustworthy? Those sorts of feelings come through
in their interactions with you? And so you can almost see each
of them as sort of a mirror. It's a biased mirror. It reflects you from that
person's perspective and that's what they're kind of implying here,
right? If we look at how my mom sees me,
mom and dad think I'm an angel, girlfriend thinks I'm strong,
big brother thinks I'm a weakling and my ex girlfriend thinks I'm
the devil incarnate it etc. So every one of these perspectives is
biased but as we go through our day, it's almost like we're seeing a glimpse
of ourselves almost like a mirror, like a reflection of who we are. And all of these reflections come
together to give us a sense of who we are that's how we know who we are,
kind of because of how we are reflected. Just like how do what you look like? Well, what you look like, because you
look at yourself in the mirror, right? And so this is that same idea. And so what this means though
is if something for example, Covid was an extreme one. But often when people are in
stressful situations, they are not getting the same social level
of social interaction that they used to. And what that means is it's almost like
people are taking down the mirrors, right? And so you're not seeing yourself imagine
if everybody removed every reflective surface, from your home and
every where every bathroom and for a period of time you
could not see yourself. You might start to wonder
what you look like. You might become really curious if
you hadn't seen yourself for a while. Well, it's the same idea if you're not
interacting with other people very much, you start to forget who you are. So if we combine these two
things we think about, hey, these social connections, first of all,
they bring us the security of being part of a larger group in
times of threat, sadness or grief. So when we feel are most vulnerable are
social connections, make us feel safer, secure and that brings us a little
bit of mental wellness from there. And also our social interactions help
us gain a sense of who we are and what role we play. And so both of these aspects of our social
connections make them very important for our mental health for
sustaining our mental health. And during times of stress, these social
interactions are medicine, just like singing, dancing, laughing, those things
I told you about these are medicine. And if the situation we're
in is making it hard for us to have social interactions
as Covid did we couldn't have the close social
interactions we wanted to. Then it's very important that we
intentionally replace some of that much like I told you about before, remember the
schedule schedule is going to come back. But that idea of literally
spending a little bit of time each day connecting with other
human beings and that doing so especially those human beings
that are important to you. Doing so will bring you
a little bit of this top thing, a little bit more security,
a little bit more safety, a little bit more sense of belonging and
that will make you feel a lot better. And so especially in cases where
that's being pulled away from us, we have have to get it back and
we have to get it back intentionally. So let's think about some implications
that comfort for this for mental health, there's sort of three implications
I'd like to highlight at personal and institutional levels. So the first one is what I just said, but let's be a little more clear,
just like the singing, dancing and laughing connecting with those we love
is critical as it counters anxiety. Therefore, if we've lost it or
even if we haven't lost it, but at times when we're stressed out. We can use our social connections
to make us feel better if we can't physically be close to somebody,
then a phone is a fantastic tool. And I want to use this as
an example just to make the mojo of this clear why the phone? The phone is nice because it really
strips things down to two sort of channels of communication,
the words you're actually saying. And then all of the nonverbal sounds
that you make, the grunts, the groans, the whatever, it's the second
that's important, not the words. And so what I tell people is man,
do things like this, get a phone buddy and just pick a tv show. We're going to pick the masked singer and
we're going to watch that together and after we watch it, we will call one
another and we'll talk about the show. Okay, what we talk about is irrelevant. It's those sounds. And so let me give you a taste of that. Imagine I was talking to a friend on
the phone and maybe I just went for a walk before the phone call and
I was, and I'm complaining and I'm saying something like this. I was walking down the sidewalk and
there was this bunch of people that walked right towards me, blocking the whole
path and there was nowhere for me to go. And I had to just sort of crunch myself
as close as I could against a wall while they went back while they went by. If the person listening to me
just does something like this mom if they just make that sound,
what does that sound that sound? Is them telling you, my goodness,
I've been in the situation you've been in, I know what that feels like, that sucks, I really feel bad that you
had to go through that. Okay, that sound is the human connection, that's them showing you
they're listening to you and they're living that event that
you just described with you, they are connected,
they care enough to do that. The phone conveys that really well, and so
one of the things I would suggest is yes. On that schedule plan sometime
just reaching out to friends and connecting with them and
doing that sort of social connectivity. Okay, so that's one way to bring the power
of a social interaction to bear. The second way is a little different, but especially it's sort of related
to the course like this. If you were going through
a course like this and you want to learn to manage your
anxiety and this is going to especially become relevant when I start telling you
about relaxation, which is coming up. It might be worth it to
do it with a friend. Remember when I said earlier that it
can sometimes be hard to know when you're anxious. We don't always detected ourselves. We can almost always
see it in someone else. We're very good at telling when
someone else is anxious, just not so good at telling when we are. And so if we work in a buddy system and if the notion is to identify things that
make us anxious, like I said before, pay attention to things in the environment
make I said, make you anxious. Well, if you don't notice you're anxious,
how do you do that? Right?
But if you have a buddy that says, hey, you're a little anxious right now,
what were you just doing? And so that body may have the best
of intentions let me warn you again. Your reaction will probably be,
I'm not anxious. That's the fight reflex when you
do that go, okay, maybe I am. What was I just doing, etc? So notice how that buddy can help
you learn when you're anxious and learn what's making you anxious and
therefore learn how to budget. That thing that's making you anxious so that buddy can really
enhance your learning. And also when you're doing
it with somebody else, it's easier to keep doing
the practice that you have to do. So you're more motivated and
you're also by the way, getting that mojo of being with
someone who cares and is helping you. So all of the mojo we talk about
from the sort of point also carries in the point two. So buddy systems are really good and
that can be institutional too. You can literally take people within
your institutions and and create buddy pairs who are there to kind of keep keep
an eye on each other's mental health. And to kind of not in a bad way,
in a helpful way and to try to help each other along as
we all negotiate really tough times. Okay, third way,
bring in the social is institutionally what you really want to do institutionally
is trying to build this community. That says pure lane,
that's supposed to say pure line. So one of the examples
that I know they use at UHN University Health Network is
they have a peer support line. And so if you're feeling challenged,
you can call this line and talk to somebody like you. Talk to somebody who has
the same experiences as you. You can connect with a fellow peer and
have that discussion. So those things are a good idea to allow
people to form those social connections. But also to build community more generally
to think of events you might have, maybe it's karaoke night where you have a little
bit of a competition with some prizes. Something to kind of bring the community
together and have them laugh and sing together those sorts of things. That makes a lot of sense because
the tighter knit your community is, the more, the stronger they
will be in the face of stress. Okay, so a final point I want to make is
when you're if you follow this notion and you're going to create some events for
community building events. Where you think, those things, we talked
about laughing, singing, dancing, and now the social connection, if you have
all of those things they're very good for building that community. But when you create those events,
think of one last thing and that's this, if possible,
make it a planned future event, make it sound really good,
like this is going to be great. Here's the prizes we got, blah,
blah, blah, blah, whatever but then make it something that people
might look forward to in general. There's a fascinating research, we talk about dopamine as being this
sort of pleasure neurotransmitter, that when dopamine is released
you feel good and that's true. But often people think things like,
if I was a gambling addict, when I win the jackpot, a bunch of
dopamine is released to make me feel good, that's not true. If you're a gambling addict,
it's when you're chasing the jackpot that the dopamine is released,
it's the thrill of the chase. It's the anticipation of winning,
that's dopamine, what this little guy is showing,
that's dopamine new. And the anticipation of the electricity
of childhood it is that, that's where a lot of the real good feeling
comes from waiting for something we want. Waiting for Christmas,
imagine waiting for Christmas or anticipating, you're going to get
some new thing that you really like. It's the anticipation that's almost
more powerful than the event itself. So if you can add some anticipation
that's got real positivity to in terms of making people feel better. Okay, so ultimately,
my final points here, as we're humans and humans need each other, like no
other animal in the animal kingdom. We are the supreme social animal, and we rely on our social connections
to get us through tough times. So anyway, you can pre build social
connections in your institution or leverage them in times of stress. It's a very good idea to do so. It's playing to our natural way of
handling those sorts of negative emotional states. Okay, cool. See in the next video where we'll
come out gratitude from a slightly different direction. Okay, bye bye.